














































Annual Audit Report on the University of Northern Philippines, Region 1 for CY 2020


 

 

Integrity, Commitment and Competence in the Commission 
 

Republic of the Philippines 

COMMISSION ON AUDIT 

Regional Office No. 1 

City of San Fernando, La Union 

Telefax No. (072) 888-6781 

 

April 26, 2021 
 

THE BOARD OF REGENTS 

University of Northern Philippines 

Vigan City, Ilocos Sur 
 

 

Gentlemen/Mesdames:  
 

 We are pleased to transmit the Annual Audit Report on the University of Northern 

Philippines (UNP), Vigan City, Ilocos Sur for the year ended December 31, 2020 in 

compliance with Section 2, Article IX-D of the Philippine Constitution and Section 43 of 

Presidential Decree No. 1445. 
 

 The report consists of three parts: Part I – Audited Financial Statements; Part II –

Observations and Recommendations, and Part III – Status of Implementation of Prior 

Years’ Audit Recommendations. 
 

 The audit covered the accounts and operations of the UNP for CY 2020. The audit 

was conducted to: a) ascertain the level of assurance that may be placed on the 

Management’s assertion on the financial statements; b) determine the propriety of 

transactions as well as extent of compliance on the applicable laws, rules and regulations; 

c) recommend agency’s improvement opportunities; and d) determine the extent of 

implementation of prior years’ audit recommendations. The audit was conducted in 

accordance with International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions. 
 

The Auditor rendered an unmodified opinion on the fairness of the presentation of 

the financial statements for the year then ended. 
 

 We request that the observations and recommendations contained in the Part II of 

the report be fully addressed and we would appreciate being informed of the actions taken 

thereon within sixty (60) days from receipt hereof, pursuant to Section 89 of the General 

Provisions of Republic Act No. 11465 otherwise known as the General Appropriations Act 

of 2020, by accomplishing the attached Agency Action Plan and Status of Implementation 

form. 
 

 We acknowledge the support and cooperation extended by Management to the 

Audit Team. 
    

              Very truly yours,     

 
               Atty. CHITO C. JANABAN                                                                                                         
                         Regional Director  

         



 

 

 

 

AGENCY ACTION PLAN and 

STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION 

Audit Observations and Recommendations 

For the Calendar Year 2020 

As of _____________________ 

 

 

Ref. 
Audit 

Observations 

Audit 

Recommendations 

Agency Action Plan 

Status of 

Implementation 

Reason for 

Partial/Delay/Non- 

Implementation, if 

applicable 

Action 

Taken/Action 

To be Taken 

 

Action 

Plan 

 

Person/Dept. 

Responsible 

Target 

Implementation 

Date 

From To    

          

          

          

          

          

          

          

          

 

Agency sign-off: 

_______________________________    __________ 

Name and Position of Agency Officer           Date 

 

 

 
Note: Status of Implementation may either be (a) Fully Implemented, (b) Ongoing, (c) not Implemented, (d) Partially Implemented, or (e) Delayed



 

 

 

Integrity, Commitment and Competence in the Commission 

 

Republic of the Philippines 

COMMISSION ON AUDIT 

Regional Office No. 1 

City of San Fernando, La Union 

Telefax No. (072) 888-6781 
 

April 26, 2021 
 

Dr. ERWIN F. CADORNA  
President 

University of Northern Philippines 

Vigan City, Ilocos Sur 

 
Dear Dr. Cadorna: 
 

 We are pleased to transmit the Annual Audit Report on the University of Northern 

Philippines (UNP), Vigan City, Ilocos Sur for the year ended December 31, 2020 in 

compliance with Section 2, Article IX-D of the Philippine Constitution and Section 43 of 

Presidential Decree No. 1445. 
 

 The report consists of three parts: Part I – Audited Financial Statements; Part II –

Observations and Recommendations, and Part III – Status of Implementation of Prior 

Years’ Audit Recommendations. 
 

 The audit covered the accounts and operations of the UNP for CY 2020. The audit 

was conducted to: a) ascertain the level of assurance that may be placed on the 

Management’s assertion on the financial statements; b) determine the propriety of 

transactions as well as extent of compliance on the applicable laws, rules and regulations; 

c) recommend agency’s improvement opportunities; and d) determine the extent of 

implementation of prior years’ audit recommendations. The audit was conducted in 

accordance with International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions. 
 

The Auditor rendered an unmodified opinion on the fairness of the presentation of 

the financial statements for the year then ended. 
 

 We request that the observations and recommendations contained in the Part II of 

the report be fully addressed and we would appreciate being informed of the actions taken 

thereon within sixty (60) days from receipt hereof, pursuant to Section 89 of the General 

Provisions of Republic Act No. 11465 otherwise known as the General Appropriations Act 

of 2020, by accomplishing the attached Agency Action Plan and Status of Implementation 

form. 
 

 We acknowledge the support and cooperation extended by Management to the 

Audit Team. 
    

              Very truly yours,    

 
               Atty. CHITO C. JANABAN                                                                                                         
                         Regional Director  

  



 

 

 

 

 

AGENCY ACTION PLAN and 

STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION 

Audit Observations and Recommendations 

For the Calendar Year 2020 

As of _____________________ 

 

 

Ref. 
Audit 

Observations 

Audit 

Recommendations 

Agency Action Plan 

Status of 

Implementation 

Reason for 

Partial/Delay/Non- 

Implementation, if 

applicable 

Action 

Taken/Action 

To be Taken 

 

Action 

Plan 

 

Person/Dept. 

Responsible 

Target 

Implementation 

Date 

From To    

          

          

          

          

          

          

          

          

 

Agency sign-off: 

_______________________________    __________ 

Name and Position of Agency Officer           Date 

 

 

 
Note: Status of Implementation may either be (a) Fully Implemented, (b) Ongoing, (c) not Implemented, (d) Partially Implemented, or (e) Delayed



 

 

 

Integrity, Commitment and Competence in the Commission 

Republic of the Philippines 

COMMISSION ON AUDIT 

NGS-Cluster 9A, Audit Team No. R1-03 

Provincial Satellite Auditing Office 

Govantes Dike, Bantay, Ilocos Sur 
                                                   

                                     
 

April 19, 2021 

 

Atty. CHITO C. JANABAN 

Regional Director 

COA Regional Office No. 1 

San Fernando City, La Union 

 

 

                    Thru:   ELMA L. MAXIMO 

       Supervising Auditor 
     

Sir: 
  
 In compliance with Section 2, Article IX-D of the Philippine Constitution and 

Section 43 of Presidential Decree No. 1445, we conducted a financial and compliance audit 

on the accounts and operations of the University of Northern Philippines (UNP), Vigan 

City, Ilocos Sur for the year ended December 31, 2020. 
   
 The audit covered the accounts and operations of the UNP for CY 2020. The audit 

was conducted to: a) ascertain the level of assurance that may be placed on the 

Management’s assertion on the financial statements; b) determine the propriety of 

transactions as well as extent of compliance on the applicable laws, rules and regulations; 

c) recommend agency’s improvement opportunities; and d) determine the extent of 

implementation of prior years’ audit recommendations.  

 

            Our audit was conducted in accordance with International Standards of Supreme 

Audit Institution and we believe that they provide reasonable bases for the results of audit. 

 

Our attached report consists of three parts. Part I contains the Audited Financial 

Statements; Part II shows the details of our significant Observations and 

Recommendations, and Part III presents the Status of Implementation of Prior Years’ Audit 

Recommendations.  

 

The audit observations and recommendations have been communicated to 

Management through Audit Observation Memoranda and finally discussed with them 

during the exit conference held on February 24, 2021.  Management’s comments are 

included in the report, where appropriate. 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

Integrity, Commitment and Competence in the Commission 

We acknowledge the cooperation and support extended by Management to the 

Audit Team in facilitating the completion of the report. 

                                                                   

 

       Very truly yours, 

            

    

       JANETTE G. YAGO 

                    State Auditor IV 

                      Audit Team Leader



 

 
 

 

 

 

 

Republic of the Philippines 

COMMISSION ON AUDIT 

Commonwealth Avenue, Quezon City 
 

 

 

 

ANNUAL AUDIT REPORT 

 
on the 

 

UNIVERSITY OF NORTHERN 

PHILIPPINES 

Vigan City, Ilocos Sur 

 

 

 

 
For the Year Ended December 31, 2020



 

 
 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 

 

A.  Introduction 

 

The University of Northern Philippines (UNP) was created by virtue of Republic 

Act (RA) No. 4449 holding the distinction of being the first and oldest state university in 

Northern Luzon. The University is mandated to give technical and professional trainings, 

advanced instructions in literature, philosophy, the science and arts besides promotion of 

technological and scientific researches and extension services.  

 

 The administration of the University and the exercise of its corporate powers are 

vested exclusively in the Board of Regents. 

  

The University is headed by Dr. Erwin F. Cadorna as President, who is assisted by 

three Vice Presidents (VPs) for Academic Affairs, Finance and Administration, and 

Research and Extension. 

         

 As of December 31, 2020, UNP had a total manpower complement of 1,206 which 

is composed of 580 permanent/temporary, 83 contractual, 312 part-time and 231 job 

orders/contract of service.  

 

B.  Operational Highlights 

 

 The reported targets and accomplishments of the University for Calendar Year 

(CY) 2020 are as follows: 

 

Organizational Outcomes/ 

Performance Indicators 

Target Actual Percentage of 

Accomplishments 

I. Higher Education Program    
Outcome Indicators:    

1. Percentage of first-time licensure 
exam-takers that pass the licensure 

exams 

60 77 128 

2. Percentage of graduates (2 years 
prior) that are employed 

45 47 104 

Output Indicators:    

1. Percentage of undergraduate 
student population enrolled in 

Commission on Higher Education  

58 71 122 

(CHED)-identified and RDC-

identified priority programs 

   

II.  Advanced Education Program    
Outcome Indicators:    

1. Percentage of graduate school 
faculty engaged in research work 

applied in any of the following:    



 

 
 

Organizational Outcomes/ 

Performance Indicators 

Target Actual Percentage of 

Accomplishments 

a. Pursuing advance research 
degree program (PhD) 

12 33 275 

b. Actively pursuing in the last 
three years investigating 

research, basic and applied 

scientific research, policy 

research, social science 

research, etc. 

81 88 109 

Output Indicators:    

1. Percentage of graduate students 
enrolled in research degree 

programs 

100 100 100 

2. Percentage of accredited graduate 
programs 

100 83 83 

III. Research Program    
Outcome Indicators:    

1. Number of research outputs in the 
last three years utilized by the 

industry or by other beneficiaries 

6 6 100 

Output Indicators:    

1. Number of research outputs 
completed within the year 

35 46 131 

2. Percentage of research outputs 
published in internationally-

refereed journal within the year 

14 18 129 

IV. Technical Advisory Extension 
Program 

   

Outcome Indicators:    

1. Number of active partnership with 
LGUs, industries, NGOs, NGAs, 

SMEs and other stakeholders as a 

result of extension activities 

38 43 113 

Output Indicators:    

1. Number of trainees weighted by the 
length of training 

5,500 5,856 106 

2. Number of extension programs 
organized and supported consistent 

with the SUC’s mandate and 

priority programs 

128 131 102 

3. Percentage of beneficiaries who rate 
the training course/s as satisfactory 

or higher in terms of quality and 

relevance 

93 88 95 

 

 

 



 

 
 

C.  Financial Highlights 

 

The financial position and financial performance of the UNP for CYs 2020 and 

2019 are shown below: 

 

Financial Position 

 
  

2020 2019 
Inc./ 

(Dec.) 

Percentage 

of 

Inc./(Dec.) 

Assets  1,865,061,344.65  1,672,409,876.95 192,651,467.70 12 

Liabilities  171,570,886.27     120,172,528.05 51,398,358.22   43 

Net Assets/Equity  1,693,490,458.38  1,552,237,348.90 141,253,109.48   9 

 
Financial Performance 

 
 

2020 2019 
Inc./ 

(Dec.) 

Percentage 

of 

Inc./(Dec.) 

Revenue 235,490,633.21  300,254,907.58 (64,764,274.37) (22) 

Current Operating Expenses 637,637,023.39  677,981,386.68 (40,344,363.29)  (6) 

Net Financial Assistance/  

     Subsidy 528,353,169.38 670,039,535.42 (141,686,366.04) (21) 

Surplus (Deficit) for the year 126,206,779.20 292,313,056.32 (166,106,277.12) (57) 

    
Summary of Total Appropriations, Allotments, Obligations and Disbursements  

 
 

2020 2019 
Inc./ 

(Dec.) 

Percentage 

of 

Inc./(Dec.) 

Fund 101     
Appropriations 711,240,282.00 636,419,311.00 74,820,971.00     12 

Allotments 711,240,282.00 623,252,559.00 87,987,723.00     14 

Continuing Appropriations 41,280,930.57 1,157,958.74 40,122,971.83 3,465 

Obligation Incurred 682,926,455.99 581,141,984.78 101,784,471.21     18 

Disbursements 464,570,551.41 492,355,938.69 (27,785,387.28)      (6) 

Unobligated Allotment 28,313,826.01 42,110,574.22 (13,796,748.21)    (33) 

     

Fund 164     

Approved Allotment 460,617,000.00 459,841,000.00 776,000.00    .20 

Utilization Incurred 87,998,000.00 163,186,000.00 (75,188,000.00)    (46) 

Unutilized Allotment 372,619,000.00 296,655,000.00 75,964,000.00    26 

 
D.  Scope of Audit 

 

 The audit covered the accounts and operations of the UNP for CY 2020. The audit 

was conducted to: a) ascertain the level of assurance that may be placed on the 

Management’s assertion on the financial statements; b) determine the propriety of 

transactions as well as extent of compliance on the applicable laws, rules and regulations; 

c) recommend agency’s improvement opportunities; and d) determine the extent of 



 

 
 

implementation of prior years’ audit recommendations. The audit was conducted in 

accordance with International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAIs). 

 

E.  Auditor’s Opinion on the Financial Statements 

 

The Auditor rendered an unmodified opinion on the fairness of presentation of the 

financial statements of UNP as at December 31, 2020. 

 
F.  Summary of Significant Observations and Recommendations 

 

The following are the significant audit observations and the corresponding 

recommendations, which were discussed with Management officials concerned during the 

exit conference held on February 24, 2021, details of which are discussed in Part II of this 

report. Management views and comments were incorporated in the report, where 

appropriate. 

 

1. Information contained in the Notes to Financial Statements did not adequately 
provide relevant information on its financial position and performance of the 

University which were not in full adherence with the disclosure requirements under 

Paragraph 127 of the IPSAS 1. Further, 12 asset accounts totaling ₱73,636,669.03 

and five liability accounts totaling ₱30,972,444.11 were not supported with 

schedules which was not in accordance with Sections 6 (e) (j) and 7, Chapter 19 of 

Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies 

(NGAs), Volume I, casting doubts on the reliability and completeness of affected 

accounts. 

 

We recommended that Management require the Accountant to observe the 

disclosure requirements in the preparation of the financial statements in accordance 

with Paragraph 127, IPSAS 1, and prepare/submit schedules of each account and 

detailed aging of payables as required under the applicable provisions of GAM for 

NGAs, Volume I. 

 

2. Timelines, processes and procedures prescribed under RA No. 9184 and its Revised 
Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) were not strictly observed in the 10 

procurement transactions of the University aggregating ₱164,150,899.24, thereby, 

defeating the principles of transparency, competitiveness, and accountability in 

government procurement.  

 

We recommended Management to require the Bids and Awards Committee (BAC) 

Chair, Heads of Technical Working Group (TWG) and BAC Secretariat to strictly 

observe the applicable provisions of RA No. 9184 and its IRR. 

 

3. The Infrastructure Project “Continuation of the Construction of Food Court with 
Multi-Level Parking” with contract cost of ₱4,940,406.40 was awarded to an 

ineligible bidder for failure of the BAC and TWG to properly evaluate bid 

documents during the conduct of bid evaluation as prescribed under Sections 30.1 



 

 
 

and 30.2.2, Rule IX of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184, rendering the 

procurement illegal. 

  

We recommended that Management direct the BAC Chair and Head,TWG to 

ensure that the bidder is eligible by carefully evaluating completeness and 

sufficiency of bid requirements during the conduct of bid evaluation to conform 

with the procedures prescribed under Sections 30.1 and 32.2.2, Rule IX of the 2016 

Revised IRR of RA No. 9184. 

 

G.  Status of Implementation of Prior Years’ Audit Recommendations 

 

 Of the 34 audit recommendations contained in the CYs 2019, 2018 and 2017 

Annual Audit Reports, 20 were implemented and 14 were not implemented. The details 

are presented in Part III of this report. 

 

H.   Summary of Audit Suspensions, Disallowances and Charges  

 

 Suspensions Disallowances Charges 

Balance, January 1, 2020  -   16,846,928.75  - 

Add:  Suspensions, Disallowances and  

          Charges during the year 

- 1,094,551.83 - 

Total - 17,941,480.58 - 

Less: Settlements made during the year  - 42,834.13  - 

Balance, December 31, 2020                      -   17,898,646.45  - 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 

 

                                       Page No. 

 

I. AUDITED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
                  

 Independent Auditor’s Report                                 1 

 Statement of Management’s Responsibility for Financial Statements    3          

 Statement of Financial Position                      4 

 Statement of Financial Performance                              5 

 Statement of Changes in Net Assets/Equity                                                   6 

 Statement of Cash Flows                                7  

 Statement of Comparison of Budget and Actual Amounts                            9 

 Notes to Financial Statements                   10 
 

II. OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS      40 
                      

III. STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF PRIOR YEARS’              
 AUDIT RECOMMENDATIONS                                                   83 

                              

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PART I 

 

AUDITED  

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 
 

   Republic of the Philippines 
COMMISSION ON AUDIT 

Commonwealth Avenue 

Quezon City 

  

 

INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT 
 

 

The President 

University of Northern Philippines 

Vigan City, Ilocos Sur 

 

Opinion 

 

We have audited the financial statements of the UNP, Vigan City, Ilocos Sur, which 

comprise the statement of financial position as at December 31, 2020 and the statement of 

financial performance, statement of changes in net assets/equity, statement of cash flows, 

and statement of comparison of budget and actual amounts for the year then ended, and 

notes to the financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies. 

 

In our opinion, the accompanying financial statements present fairly, in all material 

respects, the financial position of the UNP as at December 31, 2020, and its financial 

performance, statement of cash flows, statement of changes in assets/equity, statement of 

comparison of budget and actual amounts for the year then ended, and notes to the financial 

statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies in accordance with 

International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSASs). 

 

Basis for Opinion 

 

We conducted our audit in accordance with ISSAIs. Our responsibilities under those 

standards are further described in the Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the 

Financial Statements section of our report. We are independent of the agency in accordance 

with the Revised Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Commission on Audit 

Officials and Employees (Code of Ethics) together with the ethical requirements that are 

relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the Philippines, and we have fulfilled 

our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements and Code of Ethics. 

We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide 

a basis for our opinion. 

 

Key Audit Matters 

 

Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgment, were of most 

significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period. These matters 

were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole, and in 

forming our opinion thereon, and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters. 



 

 
 

Responsibilities of Management and Those Charged with Governance for the 

Financial Statements 

 

Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these financial 

statements in accordance with IPSASs, and for such internal control as management 

determines as necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from 

material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. 

 

Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the University’s financial 

reporting process.  

 

Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements 

 

Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements 

as a whole are free from material misstatements, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue 

an auditor’s report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is high level of 

assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISSAIs will 

always detect a material misstatement when it exists.  Misstatements can arise from fraud 

or error and are considered material if, individually or in aggregate, they could reasonably 

be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these 

financial statements. 

 

 

COMMISSION ON AUDIT 

 

By: 

 

 

ELMA L. MAXIMO 

Supervising Auditor 
 

February 26, 2021 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

10 
 

NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
 

 

1. General Information/Agency Profile 
 

The financial statements of the UNP were authorized for issue on February 10, 2021 shown 

in the Statement of Management Responsibility for Financial Statements signed by Dr. 

Erwin F. Cadorna, the President. 
 

The UNP was established on June 19, 1965 by the late Congressman Floro S. Crisologo 

and operates by virtue of RA No. 4449. The mandate of the University is to produce 

globally competitive and pro-active professionals thru excellent instruction, research, 

extension and production. The University's registered office is located in Tamag, Vigan 

City, Ilocos Sur. 
 

2. Statement of Compliance and Basis of Preparation of Financial Statements 
 

The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the IPSAS issued by the 

Commission on Audit per COA Resolution No. 2014-003 dated January 24, 2014. 
 

The financial statements have been prepared on the basis of historical cost, unless stated 

otherwise and presented in Philippine Peso, which is the reporting currency, unless 

specifically disclosed. The currency symbol “₱” is used in the financial statements. The 

Statement of Cash Flows is prepared using the direct method. 
 

3. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies 
 

3.1 Basis of Accounting  
 

The consolidated financial statements are prepared on an accrual basis in accordance 

with the IPSAS. 
 

The University derives funds for its operations from different fund sources, as 

follows: 
 

Sources of Funds Fund Book 

Regular Agency Fund (GAA) Fund 01 (GF – 101) 

Internally Generated Funds (Use of Income) Fund 05 (UI – 164) 

Business Related Funds (Income Generating Projects) Fund 06 (IGP – 161) 

Trust Receipts Fund 07 (TF – 184) 

 

3.2 Financial instruments 
 

3.2.1.Financial Assets 
 

Initial Recognition and Measurement 
 

Financial assets within the scope of IPSAS 29-Financial Instruments: 

Recognition and Measurement are classified as financial assets at fair value 



 

11 
 

through surplus or deficit, held-to-maturity investments, loans and 

receivables or available-for-sale financial assets, as appropriate. The UNP 

determines the classification of its financial assets at initial recognition. 
 

Purchases or sales of financial assets that require delivery of assets within a 

time frame established by regulation or convention in the marketplace 

(regular way trades) are recognized on the trade date, i.e., the date that the 

University commits to purchase or sell the asset. 
 

The UNP’s financial assets include: cash and special savings deposit; trade and 

other receivables, and investment in retail treasury bonds. 

 

Subsequent Measurement 
 

The subsequent measurement of financial assets depends on their classification. 

 

Financial Assets at Fair Value Through Surplus or Deficit 
 

Financial assets at fair value through surplus or deficit include financial assets 

held for trading and financial assets designated upon initial recognition at fair 

value through surplus and deficit. Financial assets are classified as held for 

trading if they are acquired for the purpose of selling or repurchasing in the 

near term. 

 

Loans and Receivables 
 

Loans and receivables are non-derivative financial assets with fixed or 

determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market. After initial 

measurement, such financial assets are subsequently measured at amortized 

cost using the effective interest method, less impairment. Amortized cost is 

calculated by taking into account any discount or premium on acquisition and 

fees or costs that are an integral part of the effective interest rate. Losses 

arising from impairment are recognized in the surplus or deficit. 

 

Held-to-Maturity 
 

Non-derivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments and fixed 

maturities are classified as held to maturity when the University has the 

positive intention and ability to hold it to maturity. 

 

After initial measurement, held-to-maturity investments are measured at 

amortized cost using the effective interest method, less impairment. 

Amortized cost is calculated by taking into account any discount or premium 

on acquisition and fees or costs that are an integral part of the effective 

interest rate. The losses arising from impairment are recognized in surplus or 

deficit. 

 



 

12 
 

Derecognition 

 

The University derecognizes a financial asset or, where applicable, a part of 

a financial asset or part of a University of similar financial assets when: 

 

 The rights to receive cash flows from the asset have expired or is 

waived 

 

 The University has transferred its rights to receive cash flows from 

the asset or has assumed an obligation to pay the received cash 

flows in full without material delay to a third party; and either: (a) 

the University has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of 

the asset; or (b) the University has neither transferred nor retained 

substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset, but has 

transferred control of the asset. 

 

Impairment of Financial Assets 

 

The University assesses at each reporting date whether there is objective 

evidence that a financial asset or a group of financial assets is impaired. 

A financial asset or a group of financial assets is deemed to be impaired 

if, and only if, there is objective evidence of impairment as a result of one 

or more events that has occurred after the initial recognition of the asset 

(an incurred “loss event”) and that loss event has an impact on the 

estimated future cash flows of the financial asset or the group of financial 

assets that can be reliably estimated. 

 

Evidence of impairment may include the following indicators: 

 The debtors or a group of debtors are experiencing significant 

financial difficulty 

 Default or delinquency in interest or principal payments 

 The probability that debtors will enter bankruptcy or other financial 

reorganization 

 Observable data indicates a measurable decrease in estimated future 

cash flows (e.g. changes in arrears or economic conditions that 

correlate with defaults) 
 

Financial Assets Carried at Amortized Cost 
 

For financial assets carried at amortized cost, the University first assesses 

whether objective evidence of impairment exists individually for financial 

assets that are individually significant, or collectively for financial assets that 

are not individually significant. If the University determines that no objective 

evidence of impairment exists for an individually assessed financial asset, 

whether significant or not, it includes the asset in a group of financial assets 

with similar credit risk characteristics and collectively assesses them for 

impairment. Assets that are individually assessed for impairment and for 



 

13 
 

which an impairment loss is, or continues to be, recognized are not included 

in a collective assessment of impairment. 

 

If there is objective evidence that an impairment loss has been incurred, the 

amount of the loss is measured as the difference between the assets carrying 

amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows (excluding future 

expected credit losses that have not yet been incurred). The present value of 

the estimated future cash flows is discounted at the financial asset’s original 

effective interest rate. If a loan has a variable interest rate, the discount rate 

for measuring any impairment loss is the current effective interest rate. 

 

The carrying amount of the asset is reduced through the use of an allowance 

account and the amount of the loss is recognized in surplus or deficit. Loans 

together with the associated allowance are written off when there is no realistic 

prospect of future recovery and all collateral has been realized or transferred 

to the University. If, in a subsequent year, the amount of the estimated 

impairment loss increases or decreases because of an event occurring after 

the impairment was recognized, the previously recognized impairment loss 

is increased or reduced by adjusting the allowance account. If a future write-

off is later recovered, the recovery is credited to finance costs in surplus or 

deficit. 

 

3.2.2. Financial Liabilities 
 

Initial Recognition and Measurement 

 

Financial liabilities within the scope of IPSAS 29 are classified as financial 

liabilities at fair value through surplus or deficit or loans and borrowings, as 

appropriate. The entity determines the classification of its financial liabilities 

at initial recognition. 

 

All financial liabilities are recognized initially at fair value and, in the case of 

loans and borrowings, plus directly attributable transaction costs. 

 

The University’s financial liabilities include trade and other payables, bank 

overdrafts, loans and borrowings, financial guarantee contracts. 

 

Subsequent Measurement 

 

The measurement of financial liabilities depends on their classification. 

 

Financial Liabilities at Fair Value Through Surplus or Deficit 

 

Financial liabilities at fair value through surplus or deficit include financial 

liabilities held for trading and financial liabilities designated upon initial 

recognition as at fair value through surplus or deficit. 



 

14 
 

Financial liabilities are classified as held for trading if they are acquired for 

the purpose of selling in the near term. 

 

This category includes derivative financial instruments entered into by the 

Group that are not designated as hedging instruments in hedge relationships 

as defined by IPSAS 29. 

 

Gains or losses on liabilities held for trading are recognized in surplus or 

deficit. 

 

Loans and Borrowing 

 

After initial recognition, interest bearing loans and borrowings are 

subsequently measured at amortized cost using the effective interest method. 

Gains and losses are recognized in surplus or deficit when the liabilities are 

derecognized as well as through the effective interest method amortization 

process. 

 

Amortized cost is calculated by taking into account any discount or premium 

on acquisition and fees or costs that are an integral part of the effective 

interest rate. 

 

Derecognition 

 

A financial liability is derecognized when the obligation under the liability is 

discharged or cancelled or expires. 

 

When an existing financial liability is replaced by another from the same 

lender on substantially different terms, or the terms of an existing liability 

are substantially modified, such an exchange or modification is treated as a 

derecognition of the original liability and the recognition of a new liability, 

and the difference in the respective carrying amounts is recognized in surplus 

or deficit. 

 

3.2.3. Offsetting of Financial Instruments 
 

Financial assets and financial liabilities are offset and the net amount reported 

in the consolidated statement of financial position if, and only if, there is a 

currently enforceable legal right to offset the recognized amounts and there 

is an intention to settle on a net basis, or to realize the assets and settle the 

liabilities simultaneously. 

 

3.2.4. Fair Value of Financial Instruments 
 

The fair value of financial instruments that are traded in active markets at 

each reporting date is determined by reference to quoted market prices or 



 

15 
 

dealer price quotations (bid price for long positions and ask price for short 

positions), without any deduction for transaction costs. 

 

3.3 Cash and Cash Equivalents 
 

Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand and cash in bank, deposits on call 

and highly liquid investments with an original maturity of three months or less, 

which are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and are subject to 

insignificant risk of changes in value. For the purpose of the consolidated statement 

of cash flows, cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and short-term deposits as 

defined above, net of outstanding bank overdrafts. 

 

3.4 Inventories 

 

Inventory is measured at cost upon initial recognition. To the extent that inventory 

was received through non-exchange transactions (for no cost or for a nominal cost), 

the cost of the inventory is its fair value at the date of acquisition. 

 

After initial recognition, inventory is measured at the lower of cost and net 

realizable value. However, to the extent that a class of inventory is distributed or 

deployed at no charge or for a nominal charge, that class of inventory is measured 

at the lower of cost and current replacement cost. 

 

Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of 

operations, less the estimated costs of completion and the estimated costs necessary 

to make the sale, exchange, or distribution. 

 

Inventories are recognized as an expense when deployed for utilization or 

consumption in the ordinary course of operations of the University. 

   

3.5 Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) 
 

Recognition 

 

An item is recognized as PPE if it meets the characteristics and recognition criteria 

as a PPE. The characteristics of PPE are as follows: 

 tangible items; 
 are held for use in the production or supply of goods or services, for 

rental to others, or for administrative purposes; and 

 are expected to be used during more than one reporting period. An item of 

PPE is recognized as an asset if: 

 It is probable that future economic benefits or service potential associated 

with the item will flow to the entity; and 

 The cost or fair value of the item can be measured reliably. 

 

 



 

16 
 

Measurement at Recognition 
 

An item recognized as PPE is measured at cost. 
 

A PPE acquired through non-exchange transaction is measured at its fair value as at 

the date of acquisition. 
 

The cost of the PPE is the cash price equivalent or, for PPE acquired through non-

exchange transaction its cost is its fair value as at recognition date. 
 

Cost includes the following: 

 Its purchase price, including import duties and non-refundable purchase 

taxes, after deducting trade discounts and rebates; 

 Expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the items; 

and 

 Initial estimate of the costs of dismantling and removing the item and 

restoring the site on which it is located, the obligation for which an entity 

incurs either when the item is acquired, or as a consequence of having 

used the item during a particular period for purposes other than to produce 

inventories during that period. 

 

Measurement after Recognition 
 

After recognition, all PPE are stated at cost less Accumulated Depreciation and 

Impairment Losses. 
 

When significant parts of PPE are required to be replaced at intervals, the University 

recognizes such parts as individual assets with specific useful lives and depreciates 

them accordingly. Likewise, when a major repair/replacement is done, its cost is 

recognized in the carrying amount of the plant and equipment as a replacement if the 

recognition criteria are satisfied. 
 

All other repair and maintenance costs are recognized as expense in surplus or 

deficit as incurred. 

 

Depreciation 
 

Each part of an item of PPE with a cost that is significant in relation to the total cost 

of the item is depreciated separately. 
 

The depreciation charge for each period is recognized as expense unless it is 

included in the cost of another asset. 

 

Initial Recognition of Depreciation 
 

Depreciation of an asset begins when it is available for use such as when it is in the 

location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner 

intended by Management. 



 

17 
 

For simplicity and to avoid proportionate computation, the depreciation is for one 

month if the PPE is available for use on or before the 15th of the month. However, 

if the PPE is available for use after the 15th of the month, depreciation is for the 

succeeding month. 

 

Depreciation Method 

 

The straight- line method of depreciation is adopted unless another method is 

more appropriate for agency operation. 

 

Estimated Useful Life 

 

The University uses the Schedule on the Estimated Useful Life of PPE by 

classification prepared by COA. 

 

The University uses a residual value equivalent to at least five percent (5%) of the 

cost of the PPE. 

 

Impairment 

 

An asset’s carrying amount is written down to its recoverable amount, or recoverable 

service amount, if the asset’s carrying amount is greater than its estimated 

recoverable service amount. 

 

Derecognition 

 

The University derecognizes items of PPE and/or any significant part of an asset 

upon disposal or when no future economic benefits or service potential is expected 

from its continuing use. Any gain or loss arising on derecognition of the asset 

(calculated as the difference between the net disposal proceeds and the carrying 

amount of the asset) is included in the surplus or deficit when the asset is 

derecognized. 

 

3.6 Provisions 
 

Provisions were recognized when the University has a present obligation (legal or 

constructive) as a result of a past event, it is probable that an outflow of resources 

embodying economic benefits or service potential will be required to settle the 

obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation. 

 

Where the University expects some or all of a provision to be reimbursed, for 

example, under an insurance contract, the reimbursement is recognized as a 

separate asset only when the reimbursement is virtually certain. 

 

The expense relating to any provision is presented in the statement of financial 

performance net of any reimbursement. 



 

18 
 

Provisions were reviewed at each reporting date, and adjusted to reflect the 

current best estimate. If it is no longer probable that an outflow of resources 

embodying economic benefits or service potential will be required to settle the 

obligation, the provisions were reversed. 

 

Contingent Liabilities 

 

The University does not recognize a contingent liability, but discloses details of any 

contingencies in the notes to the financial statements, unless the possibility of an 

outflow of resources embodying economic benefits or service potential is remote. 

 

Contingent Assets 

 

The University does not recognize a contingent asset, but discloses details of a 

possible asset whose existence is contingent on the occurrence or non-occurrence 

of one or more uncertain future events not wholly within the control of the 

University in the notes to the financial statements. 

 

Contingent assets were assessed continually to ensure that developments were 

appropriately reflected in the financial statements. If it has become virtually 

certain that an inflow of economic benefits or service potential will arise and the 

asset’s value can be measured reliably, the asset and the related revenue are 

recognized in the financial statements of the period in which the change occurs. 

 

3.7 Changes in Accounting Policies and Estimates 
 

The University recognizes the effects of changes in accounting policy retrospectively. 

The effects of changes in accounting policy were applied prospectively if 

retrospective application is impractical. 

 

The University recognizes the effects of changes in accounting estimates 

prospectively by including in surplus or deficit. 

 

The University corrects material prior period errors retrospectively in the first set of 

financial statements authorized for issue after their discovery by: 

 

3.7.1 Restating the comparative amounts for prior period(s) presented in which the 
error occurred; or 

3.7.2 If the error occurred before the earliest prior period presented, restating the 
opening balances of assets, liabilities and net assets/equity for the earliest 

prior period presented. 

 

3.8 Foreign Currency Transactions 
 

Transactions in foreign currencies were initially recognized by applying the spot 

exchange rate between the function currency and the foreign currency at the 

transaction. 



 

19 
 

At each reporting date, foreign currency monetary items were translated using the 

closing rate. 
 

3.9 Revenue from Non-Exchange Transactions 
 

Recognition and Measurement of Assets from Non-Exchange Transactions 
 

An inflow of resources from a non-exchange transaction, other than services in- kind, 

that meets the definition of an asset were recognized as an asset if the following 

criteria were met: 
 

3.9.1 It is probable that the future economic benefits or service potential associated 
with the asset will flow to the entity; and 

 

3.9.2 The fair value of the asset can be measured reliably. 
 

An asset acquired through a non-exchange transaction is initially measured at its fair 

value as at the date of acquisition. 
 

Recognition Revenue from Non-Exchange Transactions 
 

An inflow of resources from a non-exchange transaction recognized as an asset is 

recognized as revenue, except to the extent that a liability is also recognized in 

respect of the same inflow. 
 

As University satisfies a present obligation recognized as a liability in respect of 

an inflow of resources from a non-exchange transaction recognized as an asset, it 

reduces the carrying amount of the liability recognized and recognize an amount of 

revenue equal to that reduction. 
 

Measurement of Revenue from Non-Exchange Transactions 

 

Revenue from non-exchange transactions is measured at the amount of the 

increase in net assets recognized by the entity, unless a corresponding liability is 

recognized. 

 

Measurement of Liabilities on Initial Recognition from Non-Exchange 

Transactions 
 

The amount recognized as a liability in a non-exchange transaction is the best 

estimate of the amount required to settle the present obligation at the reporting date. 

 

Fees and fines not related to taxes 
 

The University recognizes revenues from fees and fines, except those related to 

taxes, when earned and the asset recognition criteria were met. Deferred income 

is recognized instead of revenue if there is a related condition attached that would 

give rise to a liability to repay the amount. 



 

20 
 

Other non-exchange revenues were recognized when it is probable that the future 

economic benefits or service potential associated with the asset will flow to the entity 

and the fair value of the asset can be measured reliably. 

 

Gifts and Donations 

 

The University recognizes assets and revenue from gifts and donations when it is 

probable that the future economic benefits or service potential will flow to the entity 

and the fair value of the assets can be measured reliably. 
 

Goods in-kind were recognized as assets when the goods were received, or there is a 

binding arrangement to receive the goods. If goods in-kind were received without 

conditions attached, revenue is recognized immediately. If conditions were 

attached, a liability is recognized, which is reduced and revenue recognized as the 

conditions were satisfied. 
 

On initial recognition, gifts and donations including goods in-kind were measured 

at their fair value as at the date of acquisition, which were ascertained by reference 

to an active market, or by appraisal. An appraisal of the value of an asset is normally 

undertaken by a member of the valuation profession who holds a recognized and 

relevant professional qualification. For many assets, the fair value were ascertained 

by reference to quoted prices in an active and liquid market. 
 

Transfers 
 

The University recognizes an asset in respect of transfers when the transferred 

resources meet the definition of an asset and satisfy the criteria for recognition as 

an asset, except those arising from services in-kind. 
 

Transfers from Other Government Entities 
 

Revenues from non-exchange transactions with other government entities and the 

related assets were measured at fair value and recognized on obtaining control 

of the asset (cash, goods, services and property) if the transfer is free from 

conditions and it is probable that the economic benefits or service potential related to 

the asset will flow to the University and can be measured reliably. 

 

3.10 Revenue from Exchange Transactions 
 

Measurement of Revenue 

 

Revenue was measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable. 

 

Rendering of Services 

 

The University recognizes revenue from rendering of services by reference to the 

stage of completion when the outcome of the transaction can be estimated reliably. 



 

21 
 

The stage of completion is measured by reference to labor hours incurred to date 

as a percentage of total estimated labor hours. 
 

Where the contract outcome cannot be measured reliably, revenue is recognized only 

to the extent that the expenses incurred were recoverable. 

 

Sale of Goods 
 

Revenue from the sale of goods is recognized when the significant risks and 

rewards of ownership have been transferred to the buyer, usually on delivery of the 

goods and when the amount of revenue can be measured reliably and it is probable 

that the economic benefits or service potential associated with the transaction 

will flow to the University. 
 

Interest Income 
 

Interest income is accrued using the effective yield method. The effective yield 

discounts estimated future cash receipts through the expected life of the financial 

asset to that asset’s net carrying amount. The method applies this yield to the principal 

outstanding to determine interest income each period. 
 

Dividends 
 

Dividends or similar distributions were recognized when the University’s right to 

receive payments is established. 

 

3.11 Budget Information 
 

The annual budget is prepared on a cash basis and is published in the UNP website. 
 

A separate Statement of Comparison of Budget and Actual Amounts (SCBAA) was 

prepared since the budget and the financial statements were not prepared on 

comparable basis. The SCBAA was presented showing the original and final 

budget and the actual amounts on comparable basis to the budget. Explanatory 

comments are provided in the notes to the annual financial statements. 
 

The annual budget figures included in the financial statements were for the 

University. 
 

3.12 Impairment of Non-Financial Assets 
 

Impairment of Cash-Generating Assets 
 

At each reporting date, the University assesses whether there is an indication that 

an asset may be impaired. If any indication exists, or when annual impairment testing 

for an asset is required, the University estimates the asset’s recoverable amount. An 

asset’s recoverable amount is higher of an asset’s or cash-generating unit’s fair 

value less costs to sell and its value in use and is determined for an individual asset, 



 

22 
 

unless the asset does not generate cash inflows that were largely independent of 

those from other assets or groups of assets. 
 

Where the carrying amount of an asset or the cash-generating unit exceeds its 

recoverable amount, the asset is considered impaired and is written down to its 

recoverable amount. 

In assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows were discounted to their 

present value using a discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the 

time value of money and the risks specific to the asset. In determining fair value less 

costs to sell, recent market transactions were taken into account, if available. If 

no such transactions can be identified, an appropriate valuation model is used. 
 

For assets, an assessment is made at each reporting date as to whether there is any 

indication that previously recognized impairment losses may no longer exist or may 

have decreased. If such indication exists, the University estimates the asset’s or cash-

generating unit’s recoverable amount. 
 

A previously recognized impairment loss is reversed only if there has been a 

change in the assumptions used to determine the asset’s recoverable amount 

since the last impairment loss was recognized. The reversal is limited so that the 

carrying amount of the asset does not exceed its recoverable amount, nor exceed the 

carrying amount that would have been determined, net of depreciation, had no 

impairment loss been recognized for the asset in prior years. Such reversal is 

recognized in surplus or deficit. 

 

Impairment of Non-Cash-Generating Assets 
 

The University assesses at each reporting date whether there is an indication that 

a non-cash-generating asset may be impaired. If any indication exists, or when 

annual impairment testing for an asset is required, the Universi ty estimates the 

asset’s recoverable service amount. An asset’s recoverable service amount is the 

higher of the non-cash generating asset’s fair value less costs to sell and its value in 

use. 
 

Where the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its recoverable service amount, the 

asset is considered impaired and is written down to its recoverable service amount. 

The University classifies assets as cash-generating assets when those assets were 

held with the primary objective generating a commercial return. Therefore, non-cash 

generating assets would be those assets from which the University does not intend 

(as its primary objective) to realize a commercial return. 

 

3.13 Related parties 
 

The University regards a related party as a person or an entity with the ability to 

exert control, individually or jointly, or to exercise significant influence over the 

University, or vice versa. 

 



 

23 
 

3.14 Employee Benefits 
 

The employees of the University are members of the Government Service 

Insurance System (GSIS), which provides life and retirement insurance coverage. 

 

The University recognizes the undiscounted amount of short term employee 

benefits, like salaries, wages, bonuses, allowance, etc., as expense unless 

capitalized, and as a liability after deducting the amount paid. 

 

The University recognizes expenses for accumulating compensated absences when 

these were paid (commuted or paid as terminal leave benefits). Unused entitlements 

that has accumulated at the reporting date were not recognized as expense. Non-

accumulating compensated absences, like special leave privileges, were not 

recognized. 

 

3.15 Measurement Uncertainty 
 

The preparation of financial statements in conformity with IPSAS, requires 

management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reporting amounts 

of assets and liabilities, and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, at the 

date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of the revenues and 

expenses during the period. Items requiring the use of significant estimates include 

the useful life of capital assets and impairment of assets. 

 

Estimates were based on the best information available at the time of preparation of 

the financial statements and were reviewed annually to reflect new information as 

it becomes available. Measurement uncertainty exists in these financial statements. 

Actual results could differ from these estimates. 

 

4. Changes in Accounting Policies 
 

On January 1, 2016, the University adopted the ₱15,000.00 threshold in recognizing PPE 

with estimated useful life of more than one year. 

 

5. Prior Period Adjustments 
 

The UNP has determined the following errors in prior periods. These were taken up as 

adjustments in the beginning balance of the Accumulated Surplus/Deficit: 

 

Particulars          2020 

Receipt of prior year income          34,194.00 

Overstatement of prior year income (116,712.76) 

Refund of tuition and other school fees (800,776.04) 

Restoration of staled/ cancelled checks (112,345.56) 

Net adjustment for previously accrued accounts payable (138,652.07) 

Reclassification of trust liabilities to Production Fund in  

   compliance with the previous audit recommendation 16,348,917.05 



 

24 
 

Particulars          2020 

Unrecognized prior year expenses (119,783.44) 

Decrease in impairment loss 1,489.10 

Total   15,046,330.28  

 

6. Cash and Cash Equivalents 
 

Account 
   2020        2019 

     (Restated) 

Cash on Hand 7,714,415.58            835,184.87 

Petty Cash Fund 1,180,001.22 1,028,900.49 

Cash in Bank –  Local Currency, Current  

     Account (LCCA) 

632,103,043.07 549,525,921.71 

Cash in Bank – Local Currency, Savings   

     Account (LCSA) 

58,188,406.95 58,188,406.95 

Cash in Bank-Foreign Currency 2,664,432.51 2,460,492.33 

Total  701,850,299.33     612,038,906.35 

 

6.1. The balance of Cash on Hand account as at December 31, 2020 comprises collection 
of tuition fees from the Department of Health (DOH) for the first semester SY 2020-

2021 for the medicine scholars that was receipted on December 30, 2020 covered 

under OR numbers 1828041-42, which were deposited on January 4, 2021, and cash 

set aside for the change fund of Income Generating Projects (IGPs) - Groceria 

previously classified as Working Fund. 

 

6.2. The Petty Cash Fund account comprises of the following: 

 

Fund  
Amount 

 (₱) 

Regular Agency Fund  50,000.00 

Internally Generated Fund (IGF) – Retained Income  390,000.00 

Business Related Rund (IGP):   

 Guestel 550,001.22  

 Groceria 20,000.00  

 Hospital 50,000.00  

 Hostel 50,000.00  

 Men’s Dorm 10,000.00  

 Ladies’ Dorm 10,000.00  

 Ceramics 10,000.00  

 Printing Services 15,000.00  

 Agri-Business 25,000.00 740,001.22 

Total  1,180,001.22 

 

6.3. The Cash in Bank – LCCA are deposits held in trust for the account of the University. 
The Cash in Bank – LCSA also includes Investment Management Account, a Trust 

Account maintained under the Trust Banking Group of the Land Bank of the 

Philippines. This trust account matures and earns interest on a monthly basis that is 

added to the Investment balance. 



 

25 
 

6.4. The Cash in Bank – Foreign Currency consists of US Dollar deposits maintained at 
Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) – Vigan under Custodial Fund.  Mainly, the US 

Dollars deposited were collections from foreign students representing payments of 

admission fees recognized as other service income, collection of school fees from 

foreign students under Medicine Special Program, BS Biology Special Program, BS 

Community Health Management Special Program, and BS Psychology Special 

Program; collection of scholarship grants under the USA Alumni Scholarship 

Program, Clarita Bellon-Salinas Scholarship Program and Sen. Paiboon 

Sumisiripong Scholarship Program.  In recognition of the changes in the US Dollar, 

Gain/Loss from Foreign Exchange on the deposit is recorded on a monthly basis 

adjusted directly to Trust Fund Account – School Fees in Foreign Currency. The 

exchange rate as of December 31, 2020 was ₱48.036. 

 

7. Investments 
 

Particulars 
2020 

        2019 

       (Restated) 

Balance, January 1, 2020 24,680,750.09    27,118,141.94 

Amortization of discount on the  

   acquisition of investment 88,319.46 88,078.15 

Investments sold/collected - (2,525,470.00) 

Balance, December 31, 2020 24,769,069.55    24,680,750.09 

 

7.1. Investment in Retail Treasury Bonds – Local represents Retail Treasury Bonds 
acquired through LBP and is being amortized on a yearly basis. 

 

8. Receivables 
 

8.1. Loans and Receivables 
 

Account 
  2020         2019 

        (Restated) 

Accounts Receivable 51,499,193.32  5,715,705.54 

Allowance for Impairment-Accounts     

   Receivable 

 

(1,077,089.44) (125,844.02) 

Accounts Receivable, net of Allowance  

   for Impairment 

 

50,422,103.88  5,589,861.52 

Due from NGAs 266,234.65 437,678.50 

Receivables – Disallowances/Charges 5,835,107.61 6,172,779.89 

Other Receivables 7,373,932.59 68,460.00 

Total (Net Value) 63,897,378.73  12,268,779.91 

 

8.1.1 Accounts Receivable account comprised payback of Faculty and Staff 
Development Program (FSDP) grantees who did not finish their studies 

amounting to (₱374,642.00), stall and rent receivables (₱303,195.24), 

receivables from students and CHED for the Free Tuition amounting to 

(₱46,211,312.02), receivables from rendering of catering services on account 



 

26 
 

(₱648,275.77), receivable from printing and publication (₱1,831,932.29). 

 

8.2. Aging/Analysis of Accounts Receivables 
 

Total 
Amount Due 

1-60 days 61-80 days 181 days -1 year Over 1 year 

51,499,193.32 2,151,838.98 46,273,573.02 318,405.27 2,755,376.05 

 

9. Inventories 
 

Particulars 
Inventory Held 

for Sale 

Inventory Held 

for Consumption 
Total 

Carrying Amount, January 1, 2020      539,410.70      2,311,982.86   2,851,393.56  

Additions/Acquisitions during the year 1,305,478.76  3,983,107.21  5,288,585.97  

Expensed during the year except writedown (1,443,247.13) (3,723,635.19) (5,166,882.32) 

Carrying Amount, December 31, 2020       401,642.33  2,571,454.88    2,973,097.21 

 

9.1. The University’s inventory held for sale represents merchandise at the Groceria de la 
Unibersidad and Guestel while inventory held for consumption represents office, and 

other supplies and materials in stock under the custody of the Property and Supply 

Office as at December 31, 2020. 

 
10. Property, Plant and Equipment 

 

Particulars 

Land and 

Land 

Improvements 

Infrastructure 

Assets/ 

Buildings and 

Other 

Structures 

Machinery and 

Equipment/ 

Furniture and 

Fixtures/Books/ 

Other PPE 

Construction in 

Progress 

TOTAL 

 

Beginning Balance 62,065,484.51 669,572,570.10 342,261,523.90 233,868,424.85 1,307,768,003.36 

Additions/ Acquisitions - 7,005,518.38 20,389,114.11 48,124,383.35 75,519,015.84 
Derecognition - - 15,352,187.00   

Total 62,065,484.51 676,578,088.48 347,298,451.01 281,992,808.20 1,367,934,832.20 

Depreciation (3,412,437.86) (123,758,786.29) (178,365,680.88) - (305,536,905.03) 

Ending Balance 58,653,046.65 552,819,302.19 168,932,770.13 281,992,808.20 1,062,397,927.17 

Gross Cost  62,065,484.51 676,578,088.48 347,298,451.01 281,992,808.20 1,367,934,832.20 

Less:                                        

Accumulated Depreciation (3,412,437.86) (123,758,786.29) (178,365,680.88) - (305,536,905.03) 
Allowance for Impairment - - - - - 

Carrying Amount 58,653,046.65 552,819,302.19 168,932,770.13 281,992,808.20 1,062,397,927.17 

 

11. Biological Assets 
 

Account        2020 
           2019 

         (Restated) 

Breeding Stocks 52,500.00       28,000.00 

Livestock 5,600.00 7,700.00 

Livestock Held for Consumption/Sale/Distribution 3,550.00 800.00 

Total  61,650.00       36,500.00 

 

 



 

27 
 

12.  Other Assets 
 

Account         2020 
           2019 

         (Restated) 

Other Assets 28,520.00 28.520.00 

Total  28,520.00 28,520.00 
 

12.1. The amount of ₱20,520.00 represents the long overdue cash advance from Mr. Julio 
Alegre, a former Student Council President. The amount of ₱8,000.00 represents the 

cost of the owner-type jeep received as a donation which is being utilized as an 

instructional material of the University. 
 

13. Financial Liabilities 
 

Account 
2020 

   2019 

   (Restated) 

Accounts Payable 54,593,667.71  30,396,820.02  

Total  54,593,667.71  30,396,820.02 
 

13.1. The Accounts Payable account consists mainly of payables to suppliers and officers 
and employees of the University that are currently due and duly supported with valid 

documents. Increase of this account resulted from increase in obligation which the 

University is required to settle. 
 

14. Inter-Agency Payables 
 

Account 
2020 

     2019 

    (Restated) 

Due to BIR 2,310,577.48  1,865,511.11  

Due to GSIS 2,987,448.62 139,962.41 

Due to Pag-IBIG 292,216.20 301,425.66 

Due to PhilHealth 255,760.11 256,635.80 

Due to NGAs 23,921,459.40 3,890,456.23 

Due to GOCCs 115,672.39 121,176.25 

Total  29,883,134.20  6,575,167.46  

 

14.1. Due to BIR account represents taxes withheld from disbursements out of Custodial 
Funds under the Regular Agency Fund (01-1), IGF – Retained Income (05-2-06-441) 

and Business-Related Funds (06-2-07) that were still unremitted as of December 31, 

2020.  Amount due was remitted in January 2021. 

 

14.2. Due to GSIS, PAG-IBIG and PhilHealth account’s balances were composed of the 
amounts withheld from the salaries of employees for their compulsory contributions 

and loan amortizations that were still unremitted as of December 31, 2020. Amounts 

due was remitted in January 2021. 

 

14.3. Due to GOCCs represents the amount withheld for the salary loan amortizations of 
employees which was remitted in January 2021. 



 

28 
 

14.4. Due to NGAs represents grants from other government agencies. 
 

15. Intra-Agency Payables 
 

Account 
      2020 

       2019 

       (Restated) 

Due to Operating Units 1,594,471.00    919,049.22  

Total  1,594,471.00    919,049.22 
 

15.1. Due to Operating Units account represents the amounts withheld from the salaries of 
employees for the payment of their obligations to the different IGPs for purchases on 

account, and loan amortizations of the members of the Non-Academic Employees 

Union and Faculty Association.  

 

16. Trust Liabilities 
 

Account 
2020 

   2019 

    (Restated) 

Trust Liabilities 56,894,204.95 57,353,598.27 

Guaranty/ Security Deposits Payable 27,927,778.12 25,066,545.15 

Total  84,821,983.07 82,420,143.42 

 

16.1. Trust Receipts under the Regular Agency Fund consist of School Fees–Fiduciary that 
was assessed before the implementation of the audit recommendation to classify such 

fees as fiduciary income. These were accrued and recognized as School Fees, an 

income account, under Internally Generated Fund. 

 

16.2. Guaranty Deposits Payable represents liability for the amount (10% of progress 
billing) withheld against billings of building contractors (usually for straight 

contracts) in order to guaranty satisfactory performance and the performance bond 

paid by suppliers of goods. The total amount withheld (10% of contract price) is 

refundable to the contractors upon satisfactory completion of the project for 

infrastructure projects and upon delivery of goods. 

 

17. Service and Business Income 
 

Account 2020 
     2019 

(Restated) 

School Fees 220,612,455.00 260,919,460.42 

Examination Fees 470,220.00 1,704,040.00  

Income from Hostels/Dormitories and  

   Other Like Facilities 

1,128,780.00 7,632,275.50  

Income from Printing and Publication 264,982.00 3,041,829.90  

Sales Revenue 2,478,962.00 7,983,046.60  

Hospital Fees 1,300,634.72 2,057,987.35  

Dividend Income - 34,194.00 

Interest Income 416,216.09 2,865,670.74  



 

29 
 

Account 2020 
     2019 

(Restated) 

Fines and Penalties-Business Income 103,765.00 149,833.00  

Other Business Income 8,677,847.69 13,623,484.45  

Miscellaneous Income 9,520.71 - 

Total  235,463,383.21 300,011,821.96  

 

18. Shares, Grants and Donations 
 

There were no grants nor donations received by the University during CY 2020. 

 

19. Gains 
 

19.1. Non-Operating Income/Gain 
 

Account  2020 
     2019 

(Restated) 

Gain on Sale of Investments -       163,435.62    

Gain on Sale of Biological Assets - 79,650.00   

Gain on Initial Recognition of Biological 

Assets 27,250.00 - 

Total   27,250.00   243,085.62  

 

20. Personnel Services 
 

20.1. Salaries and Wages 
 

Account 2020 
2019 

(Restated) 

Salaries and Wages - Regular  280,658,435.41 265,577,259.91  

Salaries and Wages - Casual/Contractual  18,039,600.85 10,137,545.95  

Total  298,698,036.26 275,714,805.86  
 

20.1.1 Increase in Salaries and Wages was due to the implementation of Salary 
Standardization V –First Tranche starting January 1, 2020. 

 

20.2. Other Compensation 
 

Account 2020 
  2019 

(Restated) 

  Personal Economic Relief Allowance (PERA)  13,824,372.20  13,943,468.06  

Representation Allowance (RA)  196,250.00 891,983.19 

Transportation Allowance (TA)  76,250.00 843,497.77 

Clothing / Uniform Allowance   3,378,000.00 3,590,000.00 

Subsistence Allowance   237,600.00 206,200.00 

Laundry Allowance  38,070.11 28,117.66 

Honoraria  15,541,406.83 53,623.00 



 

30 
 

Account 2020 
  2019 

(Restated) 

Hazard Pay  2,002,022.52 1,466,389.13 

Longevity Pay  370,000.00 430,000.00 

Overtime and Night Pay  881,922.29 17,386,176.87 

Year End Bonus  46,803,405.60 45,599,635.60 

Cash Gift  2,920,500.00 3,014,500.00 

Other Bonuses and Allowances  36,109,111.00 8,717,000.00 

Other Personnel Benefits  191,864.78 14,910,000.00 

Total  122,570,775.33 111,080,591.28 

 

20.2.1 The significant increase and decrease in Honoraria and Overtime and Night 
Pay, respectively was due to the compliance of the University to the 

recommendation of the Audit Team to recognize overload pay of faculty as 

Honoraria. 

 

20.2.2 The significant increase of Other Bonuses and Allowances for 2020 is due to 
the recognition of Collective Negotiation Agreement Incentive (CNAI) 

previously recognized as Other Personnel Benefits. 

 

20.3. Employees Future Benefits 
 

The University and its employees contribute to the GSIS in accordance with the 

Republic Act 8291 of 1997. The GSIS administers the plan, including payment of 

pension benefits to employees to whom the Act applies.  

 

20.4. Personnel Benefit Contributions 
 

Account    2020 
2019 

(Restated) 

 Retirement and Life Insurance Premiums  11,842,865.51 31,837,238.69  

 Pag-IBIG Contributions  650,300.00 712,000.00  

 PhilHealth Contributions  3,599,431.61 2,773,943.66  

 Employees Compensation Insurance Premiums  755,600.00 699,900.00  

Total  16,848,197.12 36,023,082.35  

 

20.4.1 The significant decrease in Retirement Life Insurance Premiums (RLIP) for 
2020 was due to the implementation of DBM Circular No. 2020-6 directing 

the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) to remit directly to the 

GSIS the government share in the RLIP contribution for all departments, 

bureaus and offices of the national government effective April 2020. 
 

 

 

 

 

 



 

31 
 

20.5. Other Personnel Benefits 
 

Account 2020 
2019 

(Restated) 

Terminal Leave Benefits  6,299,859.64 18,386,888.78 

Total  6,299,859.64 18,386,888.78 

 

21. Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses 
 

21.1. Traveling Expenses 
 

Account    2020 
2019 

(Restated) 

Traveling Expenses - Local 2,344,049.98 6,784,189.14 

Traveling Expenses - Foreign - 157,950.96 

Total  2,344,049.98 6,942,140.10 

 

21.2. Training and Scholarship Expenses 
 

Account 2020 
2019 

(Restated) 

Training Expenses 1,968,414.00 3,052,294.33 

Scholarship Grants/Expenses 562,037.90 798,143.63 

Total  2,530,451.90 3,850,437.96 

 

21.3. Supplies and Materials Expenses 
 

Account 2020 
2019 

(Restated) 

Office Supplies Expenses 13,520,659.10 13,396,451.32  

Accountable Forms Expenses 170,400.00 257,100.00  

Drugs and Medicines Expenses 687,674.81 1,049,695.54  

Medical, Dental and Laboratory Supplies Expenses 490,150.44 1,066,874.52 

Fuel, Oil and Lubricants Expenses 1,250,612.67 2,827,994.38  

Textbooks and Instructional Materials Expenses - 1,211,049.00   

Semi-Expendable Machinery & Equipment Expenses 1,263,101.91 1,512,774.73  

Semi-Expendable Furnitures, Fixtures & Books Expenses 3,485,431.23 7,239,974.12  

Other Supplies and Materials Expenses 16,950,464.80 16,988,147.73  

Total  37,818,494.96 45,550,061.34 

 

21.4. Utility Expenses 
 

Account 2020 
2019 

(Restated) 

Water Expenses 1,662,015.48 3,653,551.84 

Electricity Expenses 9,350,242.15 18,975,425.55  

Total  11,012,257.63    22,628,977.39  



 

32 
 

21.5. Communication Expenses 
 

Account  2020 
2019 

(Restated) 

Postage and Courier Services 13,219.00   65,745.00 

Telephone Expenses 1,167,310.83 1,551,220.21  

Internet Subscription Expenses 2,460,179.43 2,960,281.48  

Cable, Satellite, Telegraph and Radio Expenses 52,203.96 57,911.82  

Total 3,692,913.22 4,635,158.51  

 

21.6. Awards/Rewards and Prizes 
 

Account          2020 
2019 

 (Restated)  

Awards/Rewards Expenses - 19,625.00  

Prizes 155,950.00 415,646.00  

Total  155,950.00 435,271.00  

 

21.7. Extraordinary and Miscellaneous Expenses 
 

Account     2020 
  2019 

(Restated) 

Extraordinary & Miscellaneous Expenses 179,640.12   179,848.45 

Total  179,640.12   179,848.45 

 

21.7.1 This account represents expenses incidental to the performance of official 
functions of the President such as meetings, conferences, official entertainment 

and the like.  

 

21.8. Professional Services 
 

Account    2020 
2019 

(Restated) 

Legal Services 5,240.00        36,190.00  

Auditing Services 18,182.97 49,829.10  

Other Professional Services 44,930,387.80 51,193,580.68  

Total  44,953,810.77 51,279,599.78  

 

21.9. Other General Services 
 

Account 2020 
  2019 

(Restated) 

Other General  Services 25,735,299.54 27,178,606.21 

Total  25,735,299.54 27,178,606.21  

 

 



 

33 
 

21.9.1 Other General Services account represents amounts paid to Job Order 
Employees for the services rendered to the University. 

 

21.10. Repairs and Maintenance 
 

Account     2020 
    2019 

    (Restated) 

Repairs and Maintenance-Land Improvement -   517,318.60    

Repairs and Maintenance-Buildings and Other Structures 1,428,588.03 1,977,325.33  

Repairs and Maintenance-Machinery and Equipment  40,510.00 643,637.08  

Repairs and Maintenance-Transportation Equipment 477,748.45 659,092.29  

Repairs and Maintenance-Furniture and Fixtures 59,000.00 17,360.00  

Repairs and Maintenance-Other PPE 1,637.00 500.00 

Total  2,007,483.48 3,815,233.30 

 

21.11. Taxes, Insurance Premiums and Other Fees 
 

Account 2020 
    2019 

   (Restated) 

Taxes, Duties and Licenses 103,910.56      137,445.88  

Fidelity Bond Premiums 103,410.08 252,899.50  

Insurance Expenses 2,455,951.80 2,071,018.71  

Total  2,663,272.44  2,461,364.09  

 

21.12. Labor and Wages 
 

Account 2020 
     2019 

(Restated) 

Labor and Wages -      240,537.50  

Total  -     240,537.50  

 

21.13. Other Maintenance and Operating Expenses 
 

Account  2020 
 2019 

(Restated) 

Advertising Expenses 84,000.00     204,180.80  

Printing and Publication Expenses 1,115,399.42 3,032,760.81 

Representation Expenses 5,197,916.00 9,230,775.38  

Transportation and Delivery Expenses 35,430.00 87,545.14  

Rent/Lease Expenses 30,680.00 766,140.00  

Membership Dues and Contributions to  

   Organizations 370,220.00 326,640.00  

Subscription Expenses 1,046,964.27 286,500.00  

Other Maintenance and Operating Expenses 0.00 92,800.00  

Total  7,880,609.69 14,027,342.13  

 

 



 

34 
 

22. Financial Expenses 
 

Account          2020 
      2019 

     (Restated) 

Bank Charges 1,100.00     1,250.00  

Other Financial Charges - 5,000.00 

Total  1,100.00     6,250.00  

 

23. Direct Expenses 
 

Account  2020 
2019 

 (Restated) 

Cost of Sales 7,833,314.48 16,485,215.83  

Total  7,833,314.48 16,485,215.83 

 

24. Non-Cash Expenses 
 

24.1. Depreciation 
 

Account 2020 
  2019 

  (Restated) 

Depreciation-Land Improvements 337,130.67 337,130.68  

Depreciation-Other Infrastructure Assets 989,755.39 978,505.45  

Depreciation-Buildings and Other Structures 14,877,981.91 13,493,734.15  

Depreciation-Machinery and Equipment 22,354,183.81 18,786,760.38 

Depreciation-Transportation Equipment 2,737,605.95 3,070,988.09  

Depreciation-Furniture, Fixtures and Books 311,831.28 356,728.65  

Total  41,608,489.01 37,023,847.40  

 

24.2. Impairment Loss 
 

Account 2020 
    2019 

(Restated) 

Impairment Loss - Loans and Receivables 951,245.42        36,127.42  

Total  951,245.42        36,127.42  

 

24.3. Non-Operating Losses 
 

Account 
2020 2019 

(Restated) 

Loss of Assets 1,849,672.40 - 

Other Losses 2,100.00 - 

Total  1,851,772.40 - 

 

24.3.1 The Non-Operating Losses pertains mainly to the remaining book value of 
PPEs deemed unserviceable and derecognized in the books of accounts. 



 

35 
 

25. Net Financial Assistance/Subsidy 
 

Account 2020 
2019 

(Restated) 

Subsidy from National Government 513,328,226.48 670,039,535.42  

Subsidy from Other Funds 15,024,942.90 - 

Total  528,353,169.38 670,039,535.42  

 
26. Budgetary Basis 

 

26.1. The UNP’s Final Budget was composed of Original Budget based from RA 11465, 
otherwise known as the General Appropriations Act (GAA) for Fiscal Year 2020 and 

Supplemental Budget supported by Special Allotment Release Orders (SAROs). 
 

Allotment Releases 
Description 

Amount  

(₱) Number Date  

COMPREHENSIVE 

RELEASE Per Annex A 

and A-1 of NBC No. 

578 

January 14, 2020 Comprehensive release 

(GAARD) 

707,789,000.00 

COMPREHENSIVE 

RELEASE THROUGH 

GARO/SARO 

January 14,2020 Comprehensive release  

(GAARD) 

           

32,512,000.00  

GARO NO. 2020-01 

(NEGATIVE GARO) 

April 2, 2020 RLIP (24,384,000.00) 

SARO RO1-20-0000093 January 20,2020 FY 2018 Performance 

Based Bonus (EO 80) 

10,979,361.00 

SARO RO1-20-0001481 March 4, 2020 Terminal Leave Benefits 

of four (4) retired 

employees and two (2) 

former employees 

1,640,223.00 

SARO RO1-20-0001482 March 4, 2020 FY 2018 Performance 

Based Bonus (EO 80) 

171,865.00 

SARO RO1-20-0008218 April 28, 2020 Withdraw allotment 

corresponding to the RLIP 

requirements of the 1st 

tranche compensation to 

RA 11466 for the months 

of April to December 2020 

(905,250.00) 

SARO RO1-20-0011997 June 23, 2020 Discontinuance of 

appropriated programs, 

activities, or projects 

pursuant to RA No. 11469, 

the Bayanihan to Heal as 

One Act dated March 24, 

2020 

(40,000,000.00) 

SARO RO1-20-0004041 March 24, 2020 1st Tranche compensation 

adjustments for FY 2020 

pursuant to RA No. 11466 

11,849,000.00 



 

36 
 

Allotment Releases 
Description 

Amount  

(₱) Number Date  

dated January 8, 2020 as 

implemented by DBM 

NBC No. 579 dated 

January 24, 2020 

SARO RO1-20-0004042 March 24, 2020 RLIP requirements of the 

1st Tranche compensation 

adjustments for FY 2020 

1,207,000.00 

SARO RO1-20-0008831 May 4, 2020 RLIP differentials due to 

upgrading of Faculty 

Positions pursuant to 

National Budget Circular 

(NBC) 461 for the period 

July 1, 2019 to December 

31, 2019 

769,083.00 

SARO RO1-20-0022223 December 17, 

2020 

To cover additional 

Personnel Service FY 

2020 

9,612,000.00 

SARO RO1-20-0022615 December 29, 

2020 

Modification of Allotment 

from MOOE to PS to 

cover payment of Service 

Recognition Incentive 

(SRI) for FY 2020 

- 

 Total  711,240,282.00 

 

26.2. The CNAI for FY 2020 was sourced out from available MOOE allotments limited to 
the following MOOE items: Travelling Expenses, Communication Expenses, Repair 

and Maintenance and Utility Expenses. These have become available as a result of 

cost-cutting and systems improvement measures undertaken by the University   

without sacrificing the quality of our programs and services. 
 

26.3. The SRI was being granted to government employees who were deserving to be 
rewarded for their collective and unceasing participation and invaluable contribution 

to the Administration’s continuing efforts toward the establishment of streamlined 

government processes and more responsive delivery of public services, especially in 

the midst of the public health emergency caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
 

Based on Budget Circular No. 2020-65 dated December 22, 2020 re: Guidelines on 

the Grant of the One-Time Service Recognition Incentive to Government Employees 

for FY 2020 Section 6.0 states the funding Source of the SRI for Employees in the 

Executive Department to Wit: 

 

For NGAs, including SUCs and the military and uniformed personnel, the amount 

required shall be charged against the available released PS allotments of the 

respective agencies under the FY 2020 GAA. 

 



 

37 
 

In case of deficiency, the amount required may be charged against their respective 

MOOE allotment, subject to the rules on modification of allotment under Section 70 

of the General Provisions under the FY 2020 GAA, and other pertinent budgeting, 

accounting and auditing rules and regulations. 
 

26.4. The difference between the budgeted and actual amounts is shown in the SCBAA. 
 

Amounts are presented in the table below: 
 

RECEIPTS 
 

 Budgeted Amounts (₱)  Actual 

Amounts on 

Comparable 

Basis 

 Final Budget 

and Actual 

Difference 
 Original   Final  

Subsidy from National Government   

Current Year's Allotment     

PS 423,029,000.00 441,478,000.00 441,478,000.00 - 

MOOE 64,598,000.00 45,976,000.00 45,976,000.00 - 

CO 263,786,000.00 223,786,000.00 223,786,000.00 - 

Total Current Year’s Allotment 751,413,000.00 711,240,000.00 711,240,000.00 - 

Continuing Appropriation 

PS 1,000.00 682,000.00 682,000.00 - 

MOOE 6,000.00 - - - 

CO 40,599,000.00 40,599,000.00 40,599,000.00 - 

Total Continuing Appropriation 40,606,000.00 41,281,000.00 41,281,000.00 - 

Total Receipts 792,019,000.00 752,521,000.00 752,521,000.00 - 

Payments 

Current Year 

PS 423,029,000.00 441,478,000.00 427,223,000.00 14,255,000.00 

MOOE 64,598,000.00 45,976,000.00 37,112,000.00 8,864,000.00 

CO 263,786,000.00 223,786,000.00 236,000 223,550,000.00 

Sub - Total 751,413,000.00 711,240,000.00 464,571,000.00 246,669,000.00 

Continuing 

PS 1,000.00 682,000.00 - 682,000.00 

MOOE 6,000.00 - - - 

RECEIPTS 
 

 Budgeted Amounts (₱)  Actual 

Amounts on 

Comparable 

Basis 

 Final Budget 

and Actual 

Difference 
Original Final 

CO 40,599,000.00 40,599,000.00 386,000.00 40,213,000.00 

Sub - Total 40,606,000.00 41,281,000.00 386,000.00 40,895,000.00 

Total Payments 792,019,000.00 752,521,000.00 464,957,000.00 287,564,000.00 

Net Receipts/ (Payments)               -                 - 287,564,000.00 287,564,000.00 

 

Breakdown of the difference is as follows: 

 
1. Unobligated Allotment - GAA 2020     

 Personal Services (continuing for 2021) RA 11520     

 Balance, Specific Budget of NGA  10,000.00    

PERA 1,000.00    

HP-Magna Carta benefits for Public Health  

       Workers under RA 7305 1,000.00    

Honoraria -Civilian 9,000.00    

 Retirement and Life Insurance Premium 137,000.00 137,000.00            

 

147,000.00 

MOOE (Continuing for 2021)           18,000.00  

Capital Outlay (Continuing for 2021)     28,149,000.00  



 

38 
 

 

26.5. Based from Section 3.9 of DBM NBC No. 578 dated January 6, 2020 re: Guidelines 
in the Release of Funds for FY 2020, it states that: 

 

26.5.1 Use of PS Appropriations “Appropriations for PS under the FY 2020 GAA 
shall be used for the payment of personnel benefits authorized by law to be 

given to National Government personnel including those that may be 

determined during the year. Accordingly, use of PS appropriations for any PS 

deficiency will follow the rules provided herein and shall not be considered 

as a form of modification.” 
 

26.5.2 Any available allotment for PS within a department or agency may be utilized 
by said department or agency for the payment of deficiencies in authorized 

personnel benefits (Section 45, GP of FY 2020 GAA). 
  

26.5.3 The following limitations in the use of available released PS allotments or 
appropriations shall be observed: 

 

Released allotments which cannot be reallocated to other object of 

expenditures under PS: 

a. Retirement and Life Insurance Premium (RLIP); and 
b. Special Account in the General Funds (SAGFs), except if 

expressly authorized in the law creating them. 

 

26.5.4 Available released allotments for PS cannot be used to pay Collective    
Negotiation Agreement Incentive.  

 

27. Key Management Personnel 
 

The key management personnel of the University are the President, Vice President for 

Academic Affairs, Vice President for Finance and Administration and Vice President for 

Research and Extension, members of the Administrative Council and the Council of Deans. 

 

The governing body of the University is the Board of Regents composed of the following: 

 

a. Chairman of the CHED; 
b. President of the University; 
c. Chairman of the Congressional Committees on Education and Culture; 
d. Regional Director of the National Economic Development Authority 
e. Regional Director of the Department of Science and Technology 

TOTAL UNOBLIGATED ALLOTMENT   28,314,000.00 

2. Unobligated Allotment - CONTINUING 

APPROPRIATION 2020 
  

 

 PS 3,000.00   
 MOOE   - - 
 Capital Outlay  2,512,000.00     2,515,000.00  

3. Accounts Payable - not yet Due & Demandable   200,975,000.00 

4. Accounts Payable - Due & Demandable                      55,760,000.00 

Total   287,564,000.00  



 

39 
 

f. President of the Faculty Association; 
g. President of the Alumni Association of the University; 
h. President of the Student Council; and 
i. Prominent Citizens (2) selected through search. 

 

 

 



 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PART II 

 

OBSERVATIONS AND 

RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 

 



 

40 
 

OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 

 

A. Financial Audit 
 

Inadequate Disclosure of Information in the Notes to Financial Statements 

 

1. Information contained in the Notes to Financial Statements did not adequately 
provide relevant information on its financial position and performance of the 

University, which is not in full adherence with the disclosure requirements under 

Paragraph 127 of the IPSAS 1. Further, 12 asset accounts totaling ₱73,636,669.03 

and 5 liability accounts totaling ₱30,972,444.11 were not supported with schedules 

which is not in accordance with Sections 6 (e) (j) and 7, Chapter 19 of GAM for 

NGAs, Volume I, casting doubts on the reliability and completeness of affected 

accounts. 

 

Paragraph 127 of IPSAS 1 states: 

 

Notes to Financial Statements shall: 
  
a.) present information about the basis of preparation of the 

financial statements and the specific accounting policies 

used; 

 

b.) disclose the information required by ISPASs that is not 
presented on the face of the Statement of Financial Position, 

Statement of Financial Performance, Statement of Changes 

in Net Assets/Equity, and Statement of Cash Flows; and 

 

c.) provide additional information that is not presented on the 
face of the statement of Financial Position, Statement of 

Financial Performance, Statement of Changes in Net 

Assets/Equity, and Statement of Cash Flows, but that is 

relevant to an understanding of any of them. 

 

Further, Section 6 (e ) (j), Chapter 19 of GAM for NGAs, Volume I provide for 

the qualitative characteristics of financial reporting, among others: 

 

e. Reliability - reliable information is free from material 
error and bias; and can be depended on by users to 

represent faithfully that which it purports to represent or 

could reasonably be expected to represent. 

 

j. Completeness - the information in financial statements 
should be complete within the bounds of materiality and 

cost. 



 

41 
 

Section 7 of the same Chapter of GAM for NGAs, Volume I also states: 

 

Financial statements shall present fairly the financial position, 

financial performance and cash flows of an entity. Fair 

presentation requires the faithful representation of the effects 

of transactions, other events, and conditions in accordance with 

the definitions and recognition criteria for assets, liabilities, 

revenue, and expenses set out in PPSASs. The application of 

PPSASs, with additional disclosures when necessary, is 

presumed to result in financial statements that achieve a fair 

presentation. 

 

Notes shall, as far as practicable, be presented in a systematic manner. Each 

item on the face of the Statement of Financial Position, Statement of Financial 

Performance, Statement of Changes in Net Assets/Equity, and Statement of Cash Flows 

shall be cross-referenced to any related information in the Notes.  

 

In the verification of the year-end financial statements of the University, 10 

accounts were not provided with full disclosure such as non-presentation of   CY 2019 

account balance; CYs 2019 and 2020 account balances; aging and analysis of 

Receivables/Payables, and narrative description which were not in conformity with 

Paragraph 127 of IPSAS 1. Details of accounts with inadequate disclosure are as 

follows: 

 

Account 

Balance as of 

December 31, 

2020 

Required Disclosure in the Notes 

Comparative 

Balances  
Aging/ 

Analysis of 

Receivables 

 

Narrative 

Description 2019 2020 

  1   Cash and Cash Equivalents 701,850,299.33 x    

  2   Investments 24,769,069.55 x    

  3   Accounts Receivable 51,499,193.32 x   x 

  4   Inter-Agency Receivables 266,234.65 x   x 

  5   Receivables-Disallowances/ 

       Charges 5,835,107.61 x x x x 

  6   Other Receivables 7,373,932.59 x x x x 

  7   Advances to Contractors 9,083,402.66 x x x x 

  8   Other Assets 28,520.00 x    

  9   Other Payables 677,630.29 x x x x 

10   Subsidy from Other  

       Funds 

 

15,024,942.90 

 

x 

 

x 

  

x 

 

The Notes to Financial Statements are explanatory and supplemental 

information accompanying the financial statements that give readers/users a clearer 

understanding of the financial statements. Information contained in the Notes did not 

adequately provide relevant information on the financial position and performance of 

the University as shown in the above table. 

 

Further, it was also noted in the review of the Statement of Financial Position 

as of December 31, 2020 that 12 asset accounts totaling ₱73,636,669.03 and five 



 

42 
 

liability accounts totaling ₱30,972,444.11 were not supported with schedules including 

the Aging Schedule of Payables as required under the above-provisions of GAM for 

NGAs, Volume No. 1, casting doubts on the reliability and completeness of account 

balances. The table shown below shows the 17 account balances without supporting 

schedules. 

 

Account 
Regular 

Agency Fund 

Internally 

Generated 

Fund 

Business -

Related 

Fund 

Total 

  ASSETS     

  1    Accounts Receivable - 46,211,312.02 1,831,932.29 48,043,244.31 

  2    Due from National Government  

        Agencies 37,866.50 217,518.15 10,850.00 266,234.65 

  3    Receivables – Disallowances/  

        Charges 5,790,036.55 45,071.06 - 5,835,107.61 

  4    Other Receivables - 7,305,472.59 68,460.00 7,373,932.59 

  5    Merchandise Inventory - - 401,642.33 401,642.33 

  6    Office Supplies Inventory 559,458.28 - 1,840,936.00 2,400,394.28 

  7    Other Supplies and Materials  

        Inventory 164,855.88 - - 164,855.88 

  8    Semi-Expandable Information  

        and Communication Technology   

        (ICT) Equipment 6,204.72 - - 6,204.72 

  9    Advances to Contractors 8,122,874.32 960,528.34 - 9,083,402.66 

10    Breeding Stocks - - 52,500.00 52,500.00 

11    Livestock - - 5,600.00 5,600.00 

12    Livestock Held for  

        Consumption/Sale/Distribution - - 3,550.00 3,550.00 

Total Assets    73,636,669.03 

  LIABILITIES     

  1    Accounts Payable - - 457,412.41 457,412.41 

  2    Due to Operating Units 765,677.62 767,932.83 60,860.55 1,594,471.00 

  3    Trust Liabilities - - 315,152.29 315,152.29 

  4    Guaranty/ Security Deposit  

         Payable 25,389,021.35 2,534,272.27 4,484.50 27,927,778.12 

  5    Other Payables - 677,630.29 - 677,630.29 

Total Liabilities    30,972,444.11 

 

We recommended that Management require the Accountant to observe the 

disclosure requirements in the preparation of the financial statements in 

accordance with Paragraph 127, IPSAS 1, and prepare/submit schedules of each 

account and detailed aging of payables as required under the applicable 

provisions of GAM for NGAs, Volume I. 

 

During the exit conference, the Director for Financial Services explained that 

financial statements were already presented in comparative form, hence, only those not 

presented therein are to be provided with explanatory notes. 

 

As a rejoinder, it is necessary to provide comparative information in the notes 

to the financial statements although it was already presented in the financial statements 

as it is deemed relevant to an understanding of the current period’s financial statements 

and any significant increase and decrease from the prior year requires narrative 

description also. 

 



 

43 
 

Unreconciled Variance of 10 PPE Accounts - ₱14,806,098.39 

 

2. The reliability and accuracy of 10 PPE accounts recorded at ₱845,009,142.59 as 
at December 31, 2020 were doubtful due to unreconciled variance of 

₱14,806,098.39 between Accounting and Property records which is not in 

conformity with Section 42, Chapter 10 of GAM for NGAs, Volume I and Section 

5, Item No. 4 of COA Circular No. 80-124, affecting the accuracy and reliability 

of account balances. 

 

Section 42, Chapter 10 of GAM for NGAs, Volume I states: 

 

[T]he balance per PC shall be reconciled with PPELC 

maintained by the Accounting Division/Unit. They shall also be 

reconciled with other property records like PAR. 

 

Section 5, Item No. 4 of COA Circular No. 80-124 dated January 18, 1980 

provides: 

 

All inventory reports xxx. The reports shall be properly 

reconciled with accounting and inventory records. 

 

As at December 31, 2020, total PPE of the University was recorded at a cost of 

₱1,367,934,832.20. The Accumulated Depreciation amounted to ₱305,536,905.03, 

having a net book value or carrying value of ₱1,062,397,927.17.  

 

Comparison of PPE account balances in the PPE Ledger Card (LC) of the 

Accounting Office as against the Report on the Physical Count (RPC) of PPE disclosed 

a variance of ₱14,806,098.39 corresponding to 10 PPE accounts with a total cost of 
₱845,009,142.59 which represents 62 percent of the total PPE accounts in the books in 

the total amount of ₱1,367,934,832.20, as presented in the table below: 

 

PPE Account Name 

Balance as of December 31, 2020  

Difference 

  
Statement of 

Financial Positions  

RPCPPE 

 

  1    School Buildings 500,026,167.09 500,323,114.36 (296,947.27) 

  2    Machinery 4,436,606.47 4,167,503.47 269,103.00 

  3    Office Equipment 14,435,289.41 14,701,005.77 (265,716.36)  

  4    ICT Equipment 50,065,337.29 49,107,224.82 958,112.47 

  5    Medical Equipment 40,188,464.14 39,204,464.14 984,000.00 

  6    Technical and Scientific Equipment 96,306,527.06 93,350,063.06 2,956,464.00 

  7    Other Machinery and Equipment 75,958,784.35 68,911,624.80 7,047,159.55 

  8    Motor Vehicles 36,008,879.68 34,768,879.68 1,240,000.00 

  9    Furniture and Fixtures 2,408,300.58 2,159,160.58 249,140.00 

10    Books 25,174,786.52 23,510,003.52 1,664,783.00 

Total 845,009,142.59 830,203,044.20 14,806,098.39 

% of Affected PPE against total PPE in 

the books of accounts 
  62 



 

44 
 

Inquiry revealed, that the Accounting Office and Property Office did not 

reconcile their respective records during the year. Further, it was explained to the Audit 

Team that the variance of ₱14,806,098.39 was due to the following: 

 

 The difference under School Buildings account in the amount of 
₱296,947.27 represents the cost of the University Guidance Center that was 

demolished in CY 2020 that was already dropped in the books/PPELC but 

still included in the RPCPPE; 

 

 Office Equipment, ICT Equipment, Technical and Scientific Equipment, 
Other Machinery Equipment, and Books which were accrued as at 

December 31, 2020 were recorded in the PPELC but not yet in included in 

the RPCPPE. 

 

 Motor Vehicle, a 4X2 MT (NON-VGT), costing ₱1,240,000.00 covered 
with PAR 184-0313-165 was carried in the PPELC and not in the RPCPPE; 

 

 Some items under Machinery, and Furniture and Fixtures accounts of 
₱269,103.00 and ₱249,140.00, respectively under PPELC were not 

included in the RPCPPE; 

 

 Unserviceable Medical Equipment costing ₱984,000.00 was dropped in the 
RPCPPE but still carried in the PPELC as the duly accomplished Inventory 

and Inspection Report of Unserviceable Property, evidencing disposition of 

said properties were not yet submitted to Accounting Office as basis for 

dropping such from the PPELC.  

 
Non-reconciliation of records by the Accounting Office and Property Office 

was not in conformity with Section 42, Chapter 10 of GAM for NGAs, Volume I and 

Section 5, Item No. 4 of COA Circular No. 80-124 cast doubts on the reliability and 

accuracy of subject PPE accounts, affecting the fair presentation of said accounts in the 

University’s financial statements. 

 
We recommended that Management direct the Head of Property Office 

and Head of Accounting Office to reconcile and update their respective records to 

conform with Section 42, Chapter 10 of GAM for NGAs, Volume I and Section 5, 

Item No. 4 of COA Circular No. 80-124. 

 
During the exit conference, Management informed the Audit Team that 

reconciliation of records between the Accounting and Property Office is on-going. 

 

 

 

 

 



 

45 
 

B. Compliance Audit 
 

Non-Compliance with the Applicable Provisions of RA 9184 - ₱164,150,899.24 

 

3. Timelines, processes and procedures prescribed under RA No. 9184 and its 
Revised IRR were not strictly observed in the 10 procurement transactions of the 

University aggregating ₱164,150,899.24, thereby, defeating the principles of 

transparency, competitiveness, and accountability in government procurement.  

 

Section 3 of RA No. 9184 and its Revised IRR provides the governing 

principles on government procurement which requires transparency in the procurement 

process and in the implementation of contracts; competitiveness by extending equal 

opportunity to enable private contracting parties who are eligible and qualified to 

participate in public bidding; streamlined procurement process that will uniformly 

apply to all government. The procurement process shall be simple and made adaptable 

to advances in modern technology in order to ensure an effective and efficient method.  

 

We reviewed the contracts and other related documents of 11 projects, 

composing of six infrastructure projects and five procurement of goods aggregating 

₱164,150,899.24, and noted the following deficiencies: 

 

Deficiency 
Section Violated in the 

2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 
Number of lots or items, Approved Budget 

for the Contract (ABC) of   item to be bid per 

lot, and price of bid documents if not all lots 

are purchased were not indicated. 

 

Section 21.1 

The Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest shall 

provide prospective bidders the following information, among 

others; 

b) The name of the project, identification and number of lots or 

items to specific bidding, as well as the basis of evaluation of 

the project, lots, or items, where applicable; 

xxx 

e)  ABC for the project, lot, or item to be bid; 

xxx 

g)  the price of the Bidding Documents, in accordance with Section 

17.4 of this IRR; 

xxx 

h) the contract duration or delivery schedule; 

 

Delivery schedule not specified in the 

Invitation to Bid (ITB)  

 

Posting with the PhilGEPS was done beyond 

seven days as advertisement was only closed 

at the date of bid opening or end of the period 

of availability of bid documents/ period of 

advertisement. 

 

Section 21.2.1  

xxx 

The Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest shall be: 

(a) Posted continuously in the PhilGEPS website, the website of 
the Procuring Entity concerned, if available, and the website 

prescribed by the foreign government/foreign or international 

financing institution, if applicable, for seven (7) calendar 

days starting the date of advertisement. 

 

The deletion of Item 31 was issued with Bid 

Bulletin but its corresponding ABC was not 

deleted so the ABC was not reduced. 

Section 8.4.2. 

 

[T]o be binding on bidders, clarifications and amendments to the 

Invitation to Bid/Request for Expression of Interest and to the 

Bidding Documents shall be in the form of Supplemental/Bid 

Bulletins which shall be posted in the PhilGEPS bulletin board. 

 

The amendment of the warranty period and 

period of defects as agreed during the pre-bid 

conference was not included in the 

Supplemental Bid Bulletin; 



 

46 
 

Deficiency 
Section Violated in the 

2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 
 

Work items in the Program of Work (POW) 

was inconsistent with works stated in Section 

V-GCC Clause 1.31, however, no amendment 

with the bid documents was made. 

 

Non-issuance of bid bulletin to amend 

inconsistency with the quantity reflected in 

the Bill of Quantities as against POW on the 

A/C units single phase outlet item. 

Notice was sent to the President of Philippine 

Institute of Civil Engineers, who is at the same 

time one of the members of the Board of 

Regents. 

Section  8.7.  

The PhilGEPS shall allow observers, duly authorized by the BAC, 

to monitor the procurement proceedings on-line: Provided, 

however, That such observers do not have any direct or indirect 

interest in the contract to be bid as prescribed in Section 13 of this 

IRR. 

No invitation as observer was sent to Non-

Government Organization (NGO). 

Section 13.1(2) 

To enhance the transparency of the process, the BAC shall, during 

the eligibility checking, shortlisting, pre-bid conference, 

preliminary examination of bids, bid evaluation, and post-

qualification, invite, in addition to the representative of the COA, 

at least two (2) observers, who shall not have the right to vote, to 

sit in its proceedings where: 

xxx 

2. The other observer shall come from a non-government    

organization (NGO). 

Delivery period not stated in the Schedule of 

Requirements. 

“Capacity” and “No. of Units” of the 

Minimum Equipment Required was not 

specified in the Bid Data Sheet (BDS), ITB 

Clause 12.1(b) (iii.3) 

Section 17.2.  

 

The specifications and other terms in the Bidding Documents shall 

reflect the necessary specifications required to meet the needs of 

the Procuring Entity in clear and unambiguous terms. 

Award of contract to ineligible bidder due to 

failure to meet Statement of Largest 

Completed Contract (SLCC), lack of general 

and relevant experience required for the 

Project, absence of safety belts in its List of 

Equipment. 

Section 30.1 

 

[I]n this regard, bids that fail to include any requirement or are 

incomplete or patently insufficient shall be considered as “failed”. 

Inadequate verification and validation 

conducted on competence and experience as 

the authenticity of documents supporting the 

SLCC of the Supplier was doubtful. 

Section 34.3 

The post-qualification shall verify, validate, and ascertain all 

statements made and documents submitted by the bidder with the 

Lowest Calculated Bid/Highest Rated Bid using non-discretionary 

criteria, as stated in the Bidding Documents. These criteria shall 

consider, but shall not be limited to, the following: 

Xxx 

b) Technical Requirements. To determine compliance of the 

goods, infrastructure projects, or consulting services offered 

with the requirements specified in the Bidding Documents, 

including, where applicable: 

1) Verification and validation of the bidder’s stated 

competence and experience, and the competence and 

experience of the bidder’s key personnel to be assigned 

to the project, for the procurement of Infrastructure 

Projects and Consulting Services; 

      xxx 

Awarded after the expiration of bid validity. 

No evidence of written request of the 

University to extend the bidder’s bid validity. 

Section 28.2. 

Should it become necessary to extend the validity of the bids and 

bid securities beyond one hundred twenty (120) calendar days, the 

Procuring Entity concerned shall request in writing all those who 



 

47 
 

Deficiency 
Section Violated in the 

2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 
submitted bids for such extension before the expiration date 

thereof. 

Delayed issuance of Notice of Award (NOA) 

from 15 to 95 days 

Section 37.1.2.  

Within a period not exceeding fifteen (15) calendar days from the 

determination by the BAC of the bidder with the LCRB, HRRB, 

SCRB, or SRRB, and the recommendation to award the contract, 

the HoPE or his duly authorized representative shall approve or 

disapprove the said recommendation. 

Posting of performance security was 

undertaken 60 days after execution of the 

contract. 

 

Section 37.2.1.  

The winning bidder shall post the required Performance Security 

and enter into contract with the Procuring Entity within ten (10) 

calendar days from receipt by the winning bidder of the Notice of 

Award. 

Performance security was posted by the 

Supplier a day after the execution of the 

contract. 

Section 37.2.2.  

The Procuring Entity shall enter into contract with the winning 

bidder within the same ten (10) day period provided that all the 

documentary requirements are complied with. Construction Occupational Safety and Health 

(COSH) Program submitted not duly 

approved by the DOLE. 

Delayed issuance of Notice to Proceed (NTP) 

from three to 26 days 

Section 37.4.1.  

The concerned Procuring Entity shall issue the Notice to Proceed 

together with a copy or copies of the approved contract to the 

successful bidder within seven (7) calendar days from the date of 

approval of the contract by the appropriate government approving 

authority.  

Opening of bids up to the award of contract 

processes were undertaken more than four 

months to six months. 

Section 38.1. 

The procurement process from the opening of bids up to the award 

of contract shall not exceed three (3) months, or a shorter period 

to be determined by the Procuring Entity concerned. 

Performance Security in the form of cash 

posted by the Supplier/Contractor was only 

4.68 percent or P84,861.55 of the Contract 

Price of P1,811,711 or short by .32 percent or 

5,795.75. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Section 39.2. 

The performance security shall be in an amount not less than the 

required percentage of the total contract price in accordance with 

the following schedule:  

 

Form of Performance Security 

Amount of Performance 
Security (Not less than 

the required percentage 

of the Total Contract 
Price) 

a) Cash or cashier’s/ manager’s check 
issued by a Universal or Commercial 

Bank. For biddings conducted by 
LGUs, the cashier’s/manager’s check 

may be issued by other banks certified 

by the BSP as authorized to issue such 
financial instrument  

 
b) Bank draft/guarantee or irrevocable 

letter of credit issued by a Universal or 

Commercial Bank: Provided, 

however, that it shall be confirmed or 

authenticated by a Universal or 

Commercial Bank, if issued by a 
foreign bank. For biddings conducted 

by LGUs, bank draft/guarantee, or 

irrevocable letter of credit may be 
issued by other banks certified by the 

BSP authorized to issue such financial 

instrument. 

Goods and Consulting 

Services – Five percent 

(5%)  
 

 

Infrastructure Projects 
– Ten percent (10%) 

 

  
 

 



 

48 
 

Non-observance of timelines, processes and procedures as provided under the 

above-provisions of RA No. 9184 and its IRR defeated the principles of transparency, 

competitiveness, and accountability in government procurement. 

 

We recommended Management to require the BAC Chair, Heads of TWG 

and BAC Secretariat to strictly observe the applicable provisions of RA No. 9184 

and its IRR. 

 

During the exit conference, the BAC Chairman informed the Audit Team that 

the BAC will conduct a meeting to address such issue and committed to comply with 

our recommendations. 

 

 

Overvaluation of the ABC of One Infrastructure Project - ₱3,636,465.00 

 

4. Thirty-six units of equipment valued at ₱3,636,465.00 were included in the POW 
as a Special Item in the procurement titled “Continuation of the Construction of 

the College of Fine Arts and Design Building” with contract cost of 

₱24,717,643.17, which is not in accordance with Section 5 of the 2016 Revised IRR 

of RA No. 9184, and Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB) Non-Policy 

Matter (NPM) No. 138-2013, resulting in the overvaluation of the ABC Contract 

for such value. 

 

Section 5 of The 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 defined, among others, the 

following: 

 

Goods. Refer to all items, supplies, materials and general 

support services, except Consulting Services and infrastructure 

projects, which may be needed in the transaction of public 

businesses or in the pursuit of any government undertaking, 

project or activity whether in the nature of equipment, furniture, 

stationery, materials for construction, or personal property of 

any kind, including non-personal or contractual services, such as 

the repair and maintenance of equipment and furniture, as well 

as trucking, hauling, janitorial, security, and related or analogous 

services, as well as procurement of materials and supplies 

provided by the Procuring Entity for such services.  

 

Infrastructure Projects. Include the construction, 

improvement, rehabilitation, demolition, repair, restoration or 

maintenance of roads and bridges, railways, airports, seaports, 

communication facilities, civil works components of 

information technology, projects, irrigation, flood control and 

drainage, water supply, sanitation, sewerage and solid waste 

management systems, shore protection, energy/power 

electrification facilities, national buildings, school buildings, 



 

49 
 

hospital buildings, and other related construction projects of the 

government. 

  

GPPB NPM No. 138-2013 which addressed the Issue/Concern relative to the 

Interpretation of Mixed Procurement states: 

 

The procuring entity is in the best position to determine the 

correct classification of its procurement based on its identified 

needs and the best way by which these needs may be addressed, 

managed, and satisfied, and that the motivation or intention of 

the procuring entity in pursuing the project and will determine 

the primary purpose of the project. Nevertheless, it should be 

guided by the parameters and conditions in the relevant 

provisions of RA 9184 and its IRR on what should be considered 

as goods, infrastructure projects, and consulting services. In this 

wise, the nature of mixed procurement shall be determined by 

the procuring entity based on its identified primary purpose of 

the project. 

 

The University adopted mixed procurement method in the procurement of 

“Continuation of the Construction of the College of Fine Arts and Design Building” 

with an ABC of ₱26,335,911.17 which was awarded to VVH Construction Corporation 

with contract cost of ₱24,717,643.17. 

 

Review of contract documents of said Project showed that Equipment 

consisting of 35 units of desktop computers and 1 unit, 75” Led TV aggregating 

₱3,636,465.00 were included, among others, as a Special Item in the POW, instead of 

a separate procurement activity for goods.  Moreover, the amount programmed on said 

units of equipment were provided with Overhead, Contingencies and Miscellaneous 

(OCM) and Contractor’s Profit (CP) of 10 percent and 8 percent, respectively which 

then added to the value of the costs of the Equipment, presented in the table below: 

 

Goods 
Qty Unit Price 

Total Direct 

Cost 

Indirect Cost Total Cost 

(₱) OCM CP VAT (5%) 

(a) (b) (c = a * b) (d=c*10%) (e=c*8%) f = (c+d+e)    (g=c+d+e+f) 

Desktop Computer 35 70,000.00 2,450,000.00 245,000.00 196,000.00 144,550.00 3,035,550.00 

LED TV (75”) 1 485,000.00 485,000.00 48,500.00 38,800.00 28,615.00 600,915.00 

Total 3,636,465.00 

 

As gleaned from the above table, the University was unable to determine the 

parameters and conditions in the applicable provisions of RA 9184 and its IRR that 

such Equipment are to be considered as goods and not as an Infrastructure Project, 

inconsistent with Section 5 of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA 9184 and GPPB NPM No. 

138-2013, resulting in the overvaluation of the ABC for the Project by ₱3,636,465.00. 

 

We recommended that Management require the Director for 

Infrastructure Planning, Management and Development Office (IPMDO) to 

remove the provision for the subject Equipment in the Project in the POW and 



 

50 
 

Detailed Quantity and Cost Estimates, and consider the amendment of the 

Contract Documents, or use such costs for VOs, if warranted. Henceforth, strictly 

adhere to Section 5 of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 and GPPB NPM No. 

138-2013. 

 

During the exit conference, the Director for IPMDO committed to comply with 

our recommendations. 

 

 

Variation Orders (VOs) Improperly Charged Against Direct Engineering Expenditures 

 

5. Cumulative amount of positive VOs issued for three projects aggregating 
₱1,672,725.90 were charged against Direct Engineering Expenditures allotments 

of Projects, which was not in accordance with Section 37, Presidential Decree (PD) 

No. 1177 and Section 11, Special Provisions of the GAA FY 2020, casting doubts 

on the legality and regularity of the transactions. 

 

Section 37 of PD No. 1177 states: 

 

All moneys appropriated for functions, activities, projects and 

programs shall be available solely for the specific purposes for 

which these are appropriated. 

 

Section 11, Special Provisions of the GAA FY 2020, states: 

 

[F]or EAO expenses, the same shall be limited to: (i) 

administrative overhead including the hiring of individuals 

engaged through job-orders or contracts of service or such other 

engagement of personnel without any employer-employee 

relationship; (ii) preconstruction activities after detailed 

engineering; (iii) construction project management; (iv) testing 

and quality control; (v) acquisition, rehabilitation and repair of 

related equipment and parts; (vi) contingencies in relation to 

preconstruction activities. The EAO expenses shall be treated or 

booked-up as capitalized expenditures and form part of the 

project cost. 

 

The University allotted Direct Engineering Expenditures/Engineering, 

Administrative and Overhead (EAO) Expenses equivalent to 3.5 percent of the Total 

Direct and Indirect Cost that formed part of the Total Project Cost of Infrastructure of 

the following projects with aggregate contract amount of ₱67,592,551.22 : 

 

Project Name 
Contract Amount 

   (₱) 

VO Charged Beyond Contract Price 

and Direct Engineering Expenditures 

Amount (₱) % 

Construction of 

Academic Building I   

20,000,000.00 79,922.30 56.92 



 

51 
 

Project Name 
Contract Amount 

   (₱) 

VO Charged Beyond Contract Price 

and Direct Engineering Expenditures 

Amount % 

Construction/Repair/ 

Rehab of Academic 

Bldg. 

4,939,500.00 932,477.42 79.29 

Construction of Food 

Court with Multi-

Level Parking 

42,653,051.22 660,326.18 100.00 

Total 67,592,551.22 1,672,725.90  

 

Review, however, disclosed that allotments from the Direct Engineering 

Expenditures/ EAO were utilized to accommodate the cumulative amount of positive 

VOs issued by the University for the above projects in the total amount of 

₱1,672,725.90 90, as shown in the table above.  Further review, showed that 56.92 

percent to 100.00 percent of the Direct Engineering Expenditures were utilized for said 

VOs, an indication that the purpose of allotment was not served, which was not in 

adherence to Section 77, PD No. 1177 and Section 11, Special Provisions of the GAA 

FY 2020, casting doubts on the legality and regularity of the transactions.   

 

We recommended that Management instruct the Head of the Budget Office 

and Director for IPMDO to limit the charging of positive VO within the available 

savings derived from the difference between the ABC and Contract Amount. 

Henceforth, strictly adhere to Section 77, PD No. 1177 and Section 11, Special 

Provisions of the GAA. 

   

 

Incurrence of Negative Slippages 

 

6.  Negative slippages ranging from 35 percent to 109 percent with corresponding 

delays of 76 days to 237 days were incurred in the implementation of four 

infrastructure projects due to non-adoption of calibrated actions in response to 

delays in the implementation of infrastructure projects as required under Section 

III. A.2 of Annex I of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 and Annex “A”, GPPB 

Resolution No. 5-2019, depriving intended beneficiaries and the Government in 

general of the benefits derived therefrom. 
  

Section III. A. 2 of Annex I of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 states: 
 

In contracts for Infrastructure Projects:  The Procuring Entity 

shall terminate a Contract for default when any of the following 

conditions attend its implementation: 
  
a) Due to the Contractor’s fault and while the project is on-

going, it has incurred negative slippage of fifteen percent 

(15%) or more in accordance with Presidential Decree 1870; 
 



 

52 
 

b) Due to the Contractor’s fault and after the contract time has 
expired, it has incurred a negative slippage of ten percent 

(10%) or more in the completion of the work; 
 

xxx 

 

Annex “A”, GPPB Resolution No. 5-2019 dated May 18, 2019 provides: 

 

1.  The provisions of the Guidelines on Termination of 

Contracts as embodied in GPPB Resolution No. 018-2004 

remain to be the basis for contract termination in 

infrastructure projects. 

2.  To ensure the timely implementation of infrastructure 

projects and effective management of the performance of 

contractors, the following calibrated actions in response to 

delays in the implementation of infrastructure projects are 

hereby adopted:  

 

2.1. Negative slippage of five percent (5%) – The contractor 

shall be given a warning and be required to:  

 

2.1.1. Submit a detailed “catch-up” program every two 

weeks in order to eliminate the slippage and to 

restore the project to its original schedule;  

 

2.1.2. Accelerate work and identify specific physical 

targets to be accomplished over a definite period 

of time; and 2.1.3. Provide additional input 

resources such as the following; money, 

manpower, materials, equipment, and 

management, which shall be mobilize for this 

action. The implementing unit shall exercise 

closer supervision and meet the contractor every 

other week to evaluate the progress of work and 

resolve any problems and bottlenecks.  

 

2.2.  Negative slippage of ten percent (10%) – The contractor 

shall be issued a final warning and be required to come-

up with a revised detailed “catch-up” program with 

weekly physical targets together with the required 

additional input resources. The implementing unit shall 

intensify on-site supervision and evaluation of the 

project performance to at least once a week and prepare 

contingency plans for a possible termination of the 

contract or take-over of the work by administration or 

contract. 

 



 

53 
 

 2.3. Negative slippage of fifteen percent (15%) – The 

implementing unit shall initiate termination of the 

contract or take-over of the work by administration or 

contract in accordance with Section 53.3 of the 2016 

revised IRR of RA No. 9184 and the GPPB Resolution 

No. 05-2019, dated 08 March 2019 Page 5 of 6 Revised 

Guidelines for the Implementation of Infrastructure 

Projects by Administration. It shall likewise take proper 

transitory measures to minimize work disruptions, e.g., 

take-over by administration while negotiation or 

rebidding is on-going. 

 

One of the main considerations of Government in entering into contract is the 

timely completion of Projects so that intended beneficiaries could timely receive and 

enjoy the benefits derived therefrom. 

 

Audit showed, that four infrastructure projects incurred negative slippages 

ranging from 35 percent to as high as 109 percent with corresponding delays of 76 days 

to 237 days from the expiration of the targeted completion date, as presented in the 

table below:   

 

Project Title 

Completion Date No. of 

Days 

Delayed 

Negative 

Slippage 

(%) 
Targeted  Actual 

1. Construction of Academic Bldg. I  1/9/18 4/5/18   87   35 

2.   Construction/ Repair/ 
  Rehabilitation of   Academic Bldg. 

2/28/19 7/31/19 154 109 

3. Construction of Four-Storey   
Student Services Center 

8/23/19 11/7/19   76   59 

4. Construction of Medical  
and Allied Courses 

1/15/19 9/8/19 237   74 

 

The incurrence of said delays would show that the University did not adopt 

calibrated actions in response to delays in the implementation of infrastructure projects 

nor initiate the termination of the contracts when negative slippage incurred reached 

15% inconsistent with Section III. A. 2. of Annex I of The 2016 Revised IRR of RA 

No. 9184 and Annex “A”, GPPB Resolution No. 5-2019, resulting in the delayed 

completion of the Projects, thereby, intended beneficiaries and the Government in 

general are deprived of the benefits to be derived therefrom. 

 

We recommended that Management direct the Director for IPMDO to 

strictly monitor/supervise the implementation of its Projects, adopt calibrated 

actions in response to delays in the implementation of infrastructure projects and 

initiate the termination of contracts when negative slippages reached 15% while 

the Project is on-going and 10% if the Project’s contract time has expired, if 

warranted pursuant to Section III. A.2. of Annex I of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA 

No. 9184 and Annex “A”, GPPB Resolution No. 5-2019. 

 



 

54 
 

During the exit conference, the Director for IPMDO informed the Audit Team 

that they are adopting the calibrated actions in response to delays in the implementation 

of infrastructure projects for current projects being implemented. Further, Management 

agreed to implement our recommendations. 

 

 

Inadequate Detailed Engineering/Planning 

 

7.  Grant of time extensions and issuance of VOs due to inadequate detailed 

engineering activities/planning were not in accordance with Sections 17.6, and 1,2, 

3(i) of Annex “A” of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184, resulting in the delay 

of completion of projects. 

 

Section 17.6, and 1, 2, and 3(i) of Annex “A” of The 2016 Revised IRR of RA 

no. 9184 states: 

 

17.6 Detailed Engineering for the Procurement of Infrastructure 

Project - No bidding and award of contract for 

Infrastructure Projects shall be made unless the detailed 

engineering investigations, surveys and designs, for the 

project have been sufficiently carried out and duly 

approved in accordance with the standards and 

specifications prescribed by the HoPE concerned or his 

duly authorized representative, pursuant to the 

recommendation of the end-user or implementing unit and 

in accordance with the provisions of Annex “A” of this 

IRR. 

 

1.  Detailed engineering shall proceed only on the basis 

of the feasibility or preliminary engineering study 

made which establishes the technical viability of the 

project. 

 

2.   A schedule of detailed engineering activities shall include the 

following: 

   

a) Site Investigation 
b) Soils and Foundation Investigation 

xxx 

e) Preparation of Design Plans 
xxx 

k) Preparation of Utility Relocation Plan 
xxx 

o) Value Engineering Studies 
 

xxx 



 

55 
 

3(i) [N]o program of work for any project shall be 

approved without detailed engineering. 

 

Review of supporting documents of progress and final payments of two 

infrastructure projects revealed that time extensions were granted due to the issuance 

of VO and other reasons deemed unacceptable, as shown in the table below: 

  

Project 

Name/ Ref 

Time Extensions 

Granted in days 
Reasons 

Construction of 

Medical and Allied 

Courses  

(A) 

 

77 Conduct investigation and revision of design 

as the unfavourable weather 

condition/continuous rain during the month of 

August 2018 has weakened the soil 

foundation.  

 30 VO No. 1 (Additional scopes of work such as 

earthworks, demolition cost, transformer pad) 

Construction of 

Food Court with 

Multi-Level Parking 

(B) 

14 VO No. 2 (to protect the adjacent residents 

and perimeter walls along the south side from 

scouring and landslide during the excavation 

process) 

 27 Transfer of motor pool building, buses, kiosk, 

canteen and electrical transformer. 

 2 Relocation of pressure tank 

 

Evaluation revealed that the above-reasons of granting time extensions on 

Projects A (77 and 30), and B (14, 27 and 2) were due to inadequate conduct of detailed 

engineering activities such as soils and foundation investigation, site investigation, 

preparation of utility relocation plan, and preparation of design plans. It also showed 

that the Contractor of Project E did not conduct site inspection when it is deemed that 

such was conducted upon submission of its bid to determine the condition of the site as 

required under 6.3 and 6.4 Clauses in the Instruction to Bidders.  It was noted that NTP 

was issued on May 15, 2019 but the Contractor’s letter-request for time extension for 

the transfer of motor pool building, buses, kiosk, canteen and electrical transformer and 

two days for the relocation of pressure tank due to immobilization of equipment was 

only prepared on May 27, 2019 which was 12 days after commencement of work. 

 

Above-deficiencies could have been prevented or minimized if adequate 

detailed engineering activities and proper planning were conducted as mandated under 

Annex “A”, Section III.A. 2. b, Annex “I”, Section 17.6, and Sections 1,2, and 3(i) 

Annex “A” of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184, resulting in the delay of 

completion of Projects. 

 

We recommended and Management agreed to require the Director for 

IPMDO to carry out detailed engineering surveys, designs and plans prior to 

preparation of POW, bidding and award of contract pursuant to Sections 17.6, 

1,2, 3(i) of Annex “A” of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 to prevent the 

incurrence of delays in the completion of Projects. 

 



 

56 
 

Non-Conduct/Inadequate Materials Testing - ₱89,338,340.81 

 

8.   Non-conduct/inadequate materials testing, acceptance of results of test analysis 

from a non-accredited testing laboratory, and with doubtful authenticity on five 

infrastructure projects with an aggregate contract cost ₱89,338,340.81 were in 

violation of Section 9.1.1 of COA Circular No. 2012-001 and Section 11.1 Annex 

“E” of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184, resulting in doubtful quality of 

materials used. 

 

Materials testing is one of the quality control standards in the construction of 

infrastructure projects in order to achieve high quality of structures. As to 

construction/repair/rehabilitation of buildings/canals and other similar structures, the 

following applicable tests are required: 

 

 Cement 

 Aggregates (Fine and Coarse) 

 Reinforcing Steel Bars 

 Steel frames 

 Concrete Hollow Blocks (CHB) 

 Compressive Strength/Flexural Test (for concrete) 
 

Section 9.1.1 of COA Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2020 requires the 

submission of Results of Test Analysis during progress/final payments, among others. 

 

Section11.1, Annex “E” of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 states: 

  

[A]ll government infrastructure project owners must accept 

results of material test(s) coming only from DOST/BRS 

accredited laboratories. 

 

Based on the guidelines in the preparation of the ABC, ABC is composed of 

Direct Cost and Indirect Cost where Indirect Cost consists of OCM, Contractor’s Profit 

Margin and VAT component. Miscellaneous Expenses under OCM include the conduct 

of laboratory tests for quality control and plan preparation. 

 

During the year, the following five infrastructure projects with aggregate cost 

of ₱89,338,340.81 were subjected to post-audit, to wit: 

 
 

Ref. Project Name 
Payments Subject for Review 

for CY 2020 

Contract 

Amount 

(₱) 

A Construction of Academic 

Building I   

Progress and final payments 20,000,000.00 

B Construction/Repair/Rehab of 

Academic Bldg. 

Progress and final payments 4,939,500.00 

C Construction of Four-Storey 

Student Services Center 

Progress and final payments 7,170,681.50 

D Construction of Medical  Progress and final payments 14,575,108.09 



 

57 
 

 

Ref. Project Name 
Payments Subject for Review 

for CY 2020 

Contract 

Amount 

(₱) 

and Allied Courses 

E Construction of Food Court 

with Multi-Level Parking 

First and Second Progress 

Payments 

42,653,051.22 

 Total  89,338,340.81 

 

Review of records on the Results of Test Analysis supporting progress and final 

payments of above projects revealed the following deficiencies: 
 

1. Applicable materials tests were not conducted on Project C; 
 

2. No materials tests were conducted for cement, aggregates, steel frames, and 
CHB prior to the start of construction for Projects A, B, D, and E; 
 

3. For Projects A, B and D, the Results of Test Analysis on Reinforcing Steel 
Bars, and other unidentified samples tested issued by the Saint Louis 

University Materials Testing Laboratory submitted and accepted by the 

University were from a non-accredited testing laboratory as per validation 

with the Lists of Accredited Testing Laboratories from the Bureau of 

Research and Standards, Department of Public Works and Highways 

(DPWH), and 
 

4. The authenticity of the Results of Test Analysis on floor 
slab/stairs/column/foundation/concrete cylinder from the DPWH for 

Projects B and D was not determined due to the absence of Laboratory 

Report Numbers as compared to the other submitted Results issued by 

DPWH.  
 

The foregoing observations were manifestations of Management’s 

lapses/omissions in requiring contractors to conduct the necessary/applicable materials 

tests required under Section 9.1.1 of COA Circular No. 2012-001 and Section11.1, 

Annex “E” of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184, resulting in doubtful quality of 

materials used. 
 

We recommended that Management instruct the Director for IPMDO to 

require contractors to conduct all applicable materials tests and accept only those 

which are from the Lists of Accredited Testing Laboratories from the Bureau of 

Research and Standards, DPWH to conform with Section 9.1.1 of COA Circular 

No. 2012-001 and Section11.1, Annex “E” of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184. 

As regards, cement, steel frames, reinforcing steel bars, CHBs, materials testing 

should be conducted prior to the start of the construction. Moreover, require the 

Contractor to submit official receipt from the DPWH and other accredited testing 

laboratories. 

 

During the exit conference, the Director for IPMDO justified that materials 

testing for cement was not conducted because upon release of cements from the plant, 



 

58 
 

such was already subjected to quality tests, however, they committed to implement our 

audit recommendations. 
 

 

Non-imposition of Liquidated Damages Against a Contractor - ₱59,718.56 
 

9. Liquidated Damages amounting to ₱59,718.56 equivalent to 76 days of delay were 
not deducted from the final payment of the “Construction of Four-Storey Student 

Services Center” Project  which was not in accordance with Section 68 of the 2016 

Revised IRR of RA No. 9184, resulting in overpayment of said Project. 
 

Section 68 of the 2016 RIRR of RA No. 9184 requires: 
 

[F]or the procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and 

Consulting Services, the amount of the liquidated damages 

shall be at least equal to one-tenth of one percent (0.001) of 

the cost of the unperformed portion for every day of delay. 
 

Post-audit of the final payment of the “Construction of Four-Storey Student 

Services Center” Project showed that a negative slippage of 76 percent corresponding 

to 76 days of delay from the revised targeted completion date (August 23, 2019) to 

actual completion date (November 11, 2019) was incurred by the Contractor, however, 

no liquidated damages were imposed upon the Contractor which was not in accordance 

with Section 68 of The 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184, resulting in overpayment 

of ₱59,718.56. 
 

Computation of Liquidated Damages is presented below: 

 

  Amount  

(₱) 

Cost of unperformed work as of revised target completion date       785,770.51 

Multiplied by  0.001 

Multiplied by No. of Days of Delay                    76 

Total Liquidated Damages          59,718.56 

 

We recommended that Management: 
 

1. Instruct the Head of Accounting Office to draw a journal entry voucher 
to recognize Accounts Receivable account due the Contractor 

representing the liquidated damages in the amount of ₱59,718.56, and  
 

2. Direct the Director for IPMDO and Head of Accounting Office to 
ensure that liquidated damages be imposed to all Contractors for 

delays incurred pursuant to Section 68 of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA 

No. 9184. 

 

During the exit conference, Management committed to implement our 

recommendations. 



 

59 
 

Infrastructure Contract Awarded to an Ineligible Bidder - ₱4,940,406.40 
 

10. The Infrastructure Project “Continuation of the Construction of Food Court with 
Multi-Level Parking” with contract cost of ₱4,940,406.40 was awarded to an 

ineligible bidder for failure of the BAC and TWG to properly evaluate bid 

documents during the conduct of bid evaluation as prescribed under Sections 30.1 

and 30.2.2, Rule IX of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184, rendering the 

procurement illegal. 
 

Sections 30.1 and 30.2.2, Rule IX of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 

provide: 
 

30.1 [I]n this regard, bids that fail to include any requirement or 

are incomplete or patently insufficient shall be considered 

as “failed.”  
 

xxx 

    30.2.2 [a]ll bidders shall be required to include the cost of 

all taxes, such as, but not limited to, value added tax 

(VAT), income tax, local taxes, and other fiscal 

levies and duties which shall be itemized in the bid 

form and reflected in the detailed estimates. Such 

bids, including said taxes, shall be the basis for bid 

evaluation and comparison.  
 

Review of the contract and contract documents on the Procurement Project 

“Continuation of the Construction of Food Court with Multi-Level Parking” with 

contract cost of ₱4,940,406.40 showed that the Project was awarded to an ineligible 

bidder for insufficiency of bid requirements and/or its bids failed to address the required 

items in the bid documents, as follows: 
 

1. The Contractor’s SLCC was only 37 percent of the ABC, thus, failed to 
meet the at least 50 percent of the ABC to bid as required under Section 

23.4.2.4 of the said Revised IRR of RA 9184. Further, its SLCC was also 

not supported with Owner’s Certificate of Final Acceptance which was 

required under Section 23.4.2.5 of the said 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 

9184 as the project stated therein was only completed on May 8, 2020. 
 

2. Insufficiency in the List of Project Requirements such as: 
 

 Absence of Safety Engineer in the bidder’s list of key personnel, and its 
Project Engineer has only two year-experience, thus, lacked three years 

general and relevant experience as what was required in the BDS, ITB 

Clause 12.1(b) (11.2) was five years, and  
 



 

60 
 

 No harness/safety belts were in the bidder’s List of Major Equipment as 
such equipment was required in the Bid Data Sheet, ITB Clause 12.1(b) 

(11.3). 

 

3. Detailed Estimates supporting its financial bid and Bill of Quantities 
showed that the five percent Value Added Tax (VAT) component of indirect 

cost was not computed on all items, whereby, the calculated bid price or the 

contract amount of ₱4,940,406.40 was only composed of Direct Cost, 

OCM, and CP.  If five percent VAT was added to all items subject of bid, 

the bid amount would have been ₱5,187,426.72, which was already beyond 

the ABC of ₱4,980,075.00 by ₱207,351.72.  

 
4. Two additional pay items, the COSH of ₱75,865.00 and Project Billboard 

of ₱5,000.00 aggregating ₱80,865.00 were included by the bidder in its Bill 

of Quantities and Detailed Quantity and Cost Estimates, hence, not 

addressing the University’s bid requirements.  

 
As such, said Contractor had no technical and financial capabilities to undertake 

the above-Project. 

 
Above-deficiencies in the conduct of Bid Evaluation by the BAC and TWG 

were not in conformity with Sections 30.1 and 32.2.2, Rule IX of the 2016 Revised 

IRR of RA No. 9184, rendering the procurement illegal. 

 

We recommended that Management direct the BAC Chair and Head of 

TWG to ensure that the bidder is eligible by carefully evaluating the completeness 

and sufficiency of bid documents during the conduct of bid evaluation to conform 

with the procedures prescribed under Sections 30.1 and 32.2.2, Rule IX of the 2016 

Revised IRR of RA No. 9184. 

 

Management provided the following comments: 

 

a. During the opening of bids, the BAC noted that the Contractor was just 
a newly established business based from the evaluation of its Statement 

of Financial Performance and date of DTI registration of its business 

name which was on March 2, 2018.  The Philippine Contractors 

Accreditation Board (PCAB) allows newly established Small B  

Contractors to participate in government projects whose ABC does 

not exceed 50% of the Allowable Range of Contract Cost (ARCC) of 

P15 million or P7.5 million. In view of this, the BAC considered the 

Contractor, whose PCAB license is under Small B category as eligible and 

to prevent failure of bidding and delays that would considerable cost or 

waste more government resources to the detriment of the University’s 

stakeholders; 

 



 

61 
 

b. As to the experience of the Project Engineer, the BDS for the project 
only stated that the bidder must have a civil engineer who has at least five 

years of experience. The Contractor has the required civil engineer, the 

assigned materials engineer with more than 10 years of experience as a 

civil engineer and related to the owner and the assigned project engineer. 

Moreover, the materials engineer is expected that he will help in the project 

and he was also the one who actively participated in the procurement 

process; 
 

c. As to the safety officer, the Project Manager has completed a 
comprehensive 40-hour training course in Construction Occupational 

Safety and Health. The BAC determined that the safety officer need not 

be specifically stated separately and was satisfied that there is a person 

who has trained for construction occupation safety and health; 
 

d. As to the non-inclusion of the five percent VAT on their bid proposal, 
various BIR rulings will state that if it is not specifically stated that the 

price excludes VAT, then the price shall be deemed to be VAT inclusive. 

It should also be noted that the Contractor cannot collect more than 

the amount of the contract and the five percent VAT shall be 

determined from their bid proposals which was already VAT inclusive; 
 

e. As regards the body harness and safety belts, and the COSH and 
billboard costs, the BAC regrets for its omission. Management then 

appealed that the costs of COSH and billboard which were not included 

in the bid requirements items be allowed to be deducted from the contract 

cost, and as compared to the total contract cost, the total amount is not 

material. 
 

As a rejoinder, it is emphasized that results of audit were based on the contract 

documents.  
 

As regards Management’s justification on deficiency under Item No. 1 of 

the said observation on the failure of the Contractor to meet at least 50 percent of 

the ABC, such was considered by the Audit Team, however, as to the other 

deficiencies cited under Item Nos. 2 to 4 were mandatory requirements that 

must be complied with by the Contractor, thereby, its submission of incomplete 

or patently insufficient documents, is an omission on his part, a ground that should 

have caused his disqualification based on the non-discretionary “pass/fail” 

criterion under Section 30.1 of The 2016 IRR of RA No. 9184 in which the TWG 

and BAC failed to do. 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

62 
 

Doubtful Legality and Regularity of Procurement of Smart E-load - ₱1,208,100.00 
 

11. The procurement of electronic reloading services amounting to ₱1,208,100.00 was 
awarded to a non-registered PhilGEPS supplier, and not supported with 

documents to justify the use of Direct Contracting modality, which is not in 

accordance with the applicable provisions of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 

and Section 9.2.2 of COA Circular No. 2012-001, casting doubts on the legality 

and regularity of the procurement.  

 

Section 54.6 of said IRR of RA No. 9184 requires: 
 

Manufacturers, suppliers, distributors, contractors, and/or 

consultants are mandated to register with PhilGEPS and 

provide a PhilGEPS Registration Number in the following 

alternative methods of procurement as a condition for award 

of the contract: 

 

a. Section 50 - Direct Contracting 
 

Section V(A) (1) of Annex “H” of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 

prescribes: 

 

[T]o justify the need to procure through the Direct Contracting 

method, the End User should conduct a survey of the industry 

and determine the supply source. In all cases where Direct 

Contracting is contemplated, the survey must be conducted 

prior to the commencement of the procurement process. 

Moreover, the End-User must justify the necessity for an item 

that may only be procured through Direct Contracting, and it 

must be able to prove that there is no suitable substitute in the 

market that can be obtained at more advantageous terms. 

 

Annex “H”, Appendix A of said IRR of RA No. 9184 prescribes for the 

documents that the BAC shall require from suppliers for Direct Contracting method of 

procurement such as Mayor’s/Business Permit, PhilGEPS Registration Number and 

Income/Business Tax Return for ABCs above ₱500,000.00 

 

Section 9.2.2 of COA Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012 requires the 

following documents to support the payment for procurement undertaken through 

Direct Contracting, to wit: 

 

 Copy of letter to selected supplier/distributor to submit a price quotation 
and conditions of sale; 

 Certificate of Exclusive Distributorship issued by the principal under oath; 



 

63 
 

 Certification from the agency authorized official that there are no sub-
dealers selling at lower prices and for which no suitable substitute can be 

obtained at more advantageous terms to the government; 

 Study/survey done to determine that there are no sub-dealers selling at lower 
prices and for which no suitable substitute can be obtained at more 

advantageous terms to the government; 

 

 Such other documents peculiar to the contract and/or to the mode of 
procurement and considered necessary in the auditorial review and 

technical review thereof.  

 

In our audit of procurement, we noted that the supplier of “Smart eLoad P300”, 

an electronic reloading service provided by Smart Communications, Inc., was not 

registered with PhilGEPS (platinum/red membership) as validated in the PhilGEPS 

website, in violation of Section 54.6 of the Revised IRR of RA No. 9184. The 

procurement, which amounted to ₱1,208,100.00 was made through the direct 

contracting modality under exclusive dealership by virtue of BAC Resolution No. D 

12-06, s. 2020.  

 

Further, the related disbursements were not supported with required documents 

to justify the use of said modality as provided for under Section V(A) (1) of Annex “H” 

of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 and Section 9.2.2 of COA Circular No. 2012-

001, and the other mandatory requirements stated under Annex “H”, Appendix A of the 

2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 such as Mayor’s/Business Permit, PhilGEPS 

Registration Number and Income/Business Tax Return.  

 

In view of the above, the legality and regularity of said procurement transaction 

were doubtful. 

 

We recommended that Management require the BAC Secretary and/or 

Head of Accounting Office to submit lacking documents as required under 

Sections V(A) (1) of Annex “H”; 54.6; Annex “H, Appendix A of the 2016 Revised 

IRR of RA No. 9184, and Section 9.2.2 of COA Circular No. 2012-001, and ensure 

that procurement is awarded to a PhilGEPS registered supplier as required under 

Section 54.6 of said IRR of RA No. 9184. 

 

During the exit conference, the BAC Vice-Chairman explained that they 

initially inquired from Smart Communications if they can supply them with said eLoad, 

but the latter informed that they have an exclusive distributor in the Province of Ilocos 

Sur and Abra, hence, the BAC resorted to direct contracting with said 

distributor/supplier. It was further claimed that said supplier has a PhilGEPS 

registration under Red Membership which was submitted during the exit conference. 

 

The Audit Team stated that Management failed to submit the documents 

required in COA Circular and that the Certificate of Exclusive Distributorship issued 

by the principal was not even executed under oath. In the verification of the submitted 



 

64 
 

Supplier Organizational Information of the Supplier, as proof that the Supplier is 

PhilGEPS Registered, it was found out that no PhilGEPS Registration Number was 

indicated therein. 

 

Hence, we maintain our stand with our recommendation. 

 

 

Doubtful Necessity and Validity of Procured Face Shields - ₱637,000.00 

 

12. Thirteen thousand units of face shields costing ₱637,000.00 intended for students’ 
protective use for the first term, Academic Year (AY) 2020-2021 were procured 

despite implementation of blended learning system not requiring physical 

presence, and the use of Negotiated Procurement-Emergency Cases modality were 

not in accordance with Section 4, COA Circular No. 2012-003, Section 53 of the 

2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184, casting doubt on the necessity and validity of 

the transaction. 

 

Section 4, COA Circular No. 2012-003 dated October 29, 2012 defines 

Unnecessary Expenditures as: 

 

[A]n expenditure that is not essential or that which can be 

dispensed with without loss or damage to property is considered 

unnecessary. The mission or thrusts of the agency incurring 

expenditures must be considered in determining whether or not 

an expenditure is necessary. 

 

Section 53 of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 provides: 

 

Negotiated Procurement is a method of procurement of Good[s] 

whereby the Procuring Entity directly negotiates a contract with 

a technically, legally and financially capable supplie[r] in any of 

the following cases: 

 

xxx 

53.2 Emergency Cases. In case of imminent danger 

 

The University procured 13,000 units of face shields costing ₱637,000.00 

covered as per Disbursement Voucher No. 164-20101340 dated October 1, 2020 for 

the students’ protective use during the first semester, AY 2020-2021.  However, 

necessity of such procurement was doubtful since blended learning system not 

requiring physical presence is currently adopted by the University, an indication that 

such transaction was unnecessary as defined in Section 4, COA Circular No. 2012-003. 

 

Further, the adoption of Negotiated Procurement under Emergency Cases 

modality as per BAC Resolution No. E-09-10, s. 2020 dated September 4, 2020 was 

justified, to wit: 



 

65 
 

1. Prevention of said pandemic by purchasing said equipment to prevent 
possible spread of the disease by COVID 19 infected persons entering the 

University; 

 

2. In case of imminent danger to life during state of calamity, time is of the 
essence arising from natural calamities where immediate action is necessary 

to prevent damage to or loss of life or property, and 

 

3. Most beneficial to the University. 
 

However, validation disclosed that immediate distribution of said procured 

items to intended recipients/students was not undertaken because some 

recipients/students from the different Departments/Colleges of the University have not 

yet received their face shields of writing date, a manifestation that immediate response 

was not implemented as contemplated in their procurement modality which was not in 

accordance with Section 53 of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184. 

 

In view of the foregoing deficiencies, the necessity and validity of the 

transaction were doubtful. 

 

We recommended that Management require: 

 

1. Heads of End-User Units to ensure that only items necessary for their 
operations are included in their procurement plan in conformance with 

Section 4, COA Circular No. 2012-003; 

 

2. Concerned Deans/Heads of Colleges/Departments through the VPAA 
to distribute immediately the face shields to students who have not 

received theirs so that the purpose of procurement is served and items 

procured will not be wasted, and 

 

3. BAC Chair to consider the provision of immediate response when 
adopting Negotiated Procurement under Emergency Cases modality to 

strictly adhere to Section 53 of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA 9184. 
  

During the exit conference, we were informed that the Student Council 

President will submit written justification on the distribution of face shields.  

 

 

Improper Flexible Work Arrangement of Faculty 

 

13. Flexible work arrangement implemented by the University faculty was not in 
conformity with Sections 5 and 6, Rule XVII of the Omnibus Rules Implementing 

Book V of Executive Order (EO) No. 292, Chapter 5, Civil Service Commission 

(CSC) Memorandum Circular (MC) No. 19, s. 2005, and CSC MC No. 25, s. 2019, 

casting doubts on the validity and propriety of such work arrangement. 
 



 

66 
 

Sections 5 and 6, Rule XVII of the Omnibus Rules Implementing Book V of 

EO 292 provide, to wit: 

 

Sec 5.  Officers and employees of all departments and agencies 

except those covered by special laws shall render not less 

than eight hours of work a day for five days a week or 

a total of forty hours a week, exclusive of time for 

lunc[h].  

 

Sec 6.  Flexible working hours may be allowed subject to the 

discretion of the head of department or agenc[y].  

 

Chapter 5, CSC MC No. 19, s. 2005 provides, among others: 

 

Faculty members, except those covered by special laws, shall 

render not less than eight (8) hours of work a day for five (5) 

days a week or a total of forty (40) hours a week exclusive for 

time for lunc[h]. 

 

POLICIES 

 

1. The LCU shall prescribe its own rules and regulations 
governing working hours and attendance of its faculty 

members. 

 

2. It shall be the duty of the head of the department in LCU to 
require all faculty members under him/her to strictly observe 

the prescribed office hour[s]. 

 

 

Furthermore, Section 5, CSC MC No. 25, s. 2019 states:  

 

Agencies shall formulate their internal rules in the 

implementation of the flexible working hour[s]. 

 

Review of the flexible work arrangement implemented by the University 

faculty as reflected in their Individual Faculty Workload in rendering their total 

workload and extra loads for the second term, AY 2019-2020 revealed the following 

deficiencies: 

 

1. No internal rules in conformity with Chapter 5(1), CSC MC No. 19, s. 2005 
and Section 5,CSC MC No. 25, s. 2019 duly approved by the SUC  

resident were formulated as basis in the implementation of flexible working 

hours; 

 



 

67 
 

2. Some work hours in a day is either more or less than the required eight 
hours of work a day. The excess of the eight hours rendered on a day(s) 

is(are) used to offset the deficit in the previous day(s) which was not 

in conformity with Section 5, Rule XVII of the Omnibus Rules 

Implementing Book V of EO No. 292, Chapter 5, CSC MC No. 19, 

s. 2005, and Section 10.4, CSC- DBM Joint Circular No. 1, s. 2015 

which states that: “The period of overtime services shall not be used 

to offset undertime.” As presented in the table below: 

 

Faculty Position Days AM PM 
No. of Hrs. 

Rendered 

Offsetting of 

Overtime/ 

(Undertime)  

1. Asst. Prof V  Mon 7:30-11:00 12:00-6:00 9.50 1.50 

    (DLH) Tues 7:30-11:00 12:00-4:30 8.00  

 Wed 7:30-11:00 12:00-6:00 9.50 1.50 

 Thurs 7:30-11:00 12:00-4:30 8.00  

 Fri      None 12:00-5:00 5.00 (5.00) 

 Total   40.00  

2.  Asst. Prof. I  Mon 7:30-12:00      1:00-5:00 8.50 .50 

    (DLHS) Tues 7:00-12:00 1:00-6:00 10.00 2.00 

 Wed 8:00-12:00      1:00-5:30 8.50 .50 

 Thurs 8:00-12:00 1:00-6:00 9.00 1.00 

 Fri  8:00-12:00  4.00 (4.00) 

 Total   40.00  

3. Asso. Prof V Mon 7:30-12:00 1:00-5:30 9.00 1.00 

   (DMNS) Tues 8:00-11:30 12:30-5:00 8.00  

 Wed 7:30-12:00     1:00-5:00 8.50 .50 

 Thurs 7:30-11:00     12:00-5:00 8.50 .50 

 Fri Time-Off   

 Sat  1:30-7:30 6.00 (2.00) 

 Total   40.00  

 

3.  As to faculty with administrative designations, granted with vacation and 

sick leave credits, teaching overload was rendered within the 8-hour 

prescribed work hours rendered on 8:30 – 11:30, 10:30 – 11:30, 4:00 – 5:00, 

12:00 – 1:30 and 12:30 – 2:30, among others and paid as such, which was 

not proper. Some details/examples are laid down below:  

 

Faculty with 

Designation 

Flexi-Time 
Overload 

Teaching 

Time  

No. of 

Overload 

Teaching 

Hrs 

Days AM PM 
No. of 

Hrs./Day 

1. Asst. Dean Mon 8:00-12:00 1:00-6:00 9.00   

    Tues 8:00-12:00 1:00-5:30 8.5   

 Wed 8:00-12:00 1:00-5:30 8.5   

 Thurs 8:00-11:30 12:30-4:00 7.00 4:00-5:30 1.50 

 Fri 8:00-12:00 1:00-4:00 7.00 10:30-11:30 1.00 

 Total   40.00   

2. Head  Mon 8:00-12:00 1:00-5:30 8.50   

    (DMNS) Tues 8:00-12:00 2:30-5:30 7.00 12:00-1:30 1.50 

 Wed 8:30-11:30 2:30-5:30 6.00 12:30-2:30 2.00 

 Thurs 8:00-12:00 2:30-5:30 7.00 12:00-1:30 1.50 

 Fri 8:00-12:00 1:00-5:30 8.50   

 Sat 10:30-1:30  3.00   

 Total   40.00   



 

68 
 

Faculty with 

Designation 

Flexi-Time 
Overload 

Teaching 

Time  

No. of 

Overload 

Teaching 

Hrs 

Days AM PM 
No. of 

Hrs./Day 

3. Coordinator, 
Science & 

Technology 

Researches  

  

  

Mon 8:00-12:00 1:00-6:00 9.00   

Tues  12:00-6:00 6.00 8:30-11:30 3.00 

Wed 8:00-12:00 1:00-6:00 9.00   

Thurs  12:00-6:00 6.00 8:30-11:30 3.00 

Fri 9:00-12:00 1:00-5:00 7.00   

Sat  1:30-4:30 3.00   

 Total   40.00   

 

4. The flexi-time arrangement implemented by the faculty members as 

reflected in their Individual Faculty workload was not reviewed by the 

Human Resource Management Officer (HRMO), in charge of determining 

propriety and truthfulness of rendered services. 

 

We recommended that Management: 

 

1.   Formulate internal rules in conformity with Sections 5 and 6, Rule XVII 

of the Omnibus Rules Implementing Book V of EO No. 292, Chapter 5 

of CSC MC No. 19, s. 2005, Section 5, CSC MC No. 25, s. 2019, and 

Section 10.4, CSC- DBM Joint Circular No. 1, s. 2015, and  

 

2. For internal control and administrative purposes, require the Head of 
HRMO to review the official time of all faculty reflected in their 

Individual Faculty Workload for every term. 

 

Management commented that it was deemed that the approval by the President 

of the Individual Faculty Load reflecting the official time of faculty was 

already sufficient to implement the flexible working hours of faculty, thus, there was a 

need to revisit the workloads of their faculty. Further, they also informed that the Board 

of Regents (BOR) had approved the proposed Internal Guidelines in the 

Implementation of the Flexible Working Hours formulated by Management as per BOR 

Resolution No. 39, s.2020.  It was further commented that they encountered difficulties 

in programming for subject schedules due to the increasing volume of students 

every year with only a total of over 175 faculty members and limited number of 

classrooms. 

 

During the exit conference, Management explained that some faculty were 

teaching regular load during Saturdays, that’s why time-off was granted on week days. 

Although there were workdays which are less than eight hours a day were rendered, 

other days were more than eight hours which completes then the required 40 hours per 

week.  

 

As a rejoinder, the Audit Team will monitor the observance of the Guidelines 

in the Implementation of the Flexible Working Hours to comply with our audit 

recommendations. 

 



 

69 
 

Invalid Payments of Salary and Bonus Differentials - ₱4,630,346.57 

 

14. The use of effectivity date of appointment as basis in computing for the payment 

of salary and Year-End Bonus (YEB) differentials of 124 faculty members whose 

ranks were subject of reclassification was not in accordance with Sections 17 and 

23, Rule VI of the 2017 Omnibus Rules on Appointments and Other Human 

Resource Actions (ORAOHRA) (Revised 2018), resulting in the overpayment of 

differentials of ₱4,060,314.20 and over-remittance of government shares with 

GSIS of ₱570,032.37, aggregating ₱4,630,346.57. 
 

Section 17, Rule VI, of the 2017 ORAOHRA (Revised July 2018) provides, 

among others, to wit: 

 

1. If the appointee has taken his/her oath of office and assumed 
the duties of position, he/she shall be entitled to receive 

his/her salary at once without awaiting the 

approval/validation of his/her appointment by the 

Commissio[n]. 

 

2. The appointment of officials or employees who are on 
official leave of absence, training or scholarship grant, shall 

be effective upon assumption or upon return from official 

leave of absence, scholarship or training. 

 

Moreover, Section 23 of the same Rule states:  

 

The date of the actual assumption of duties of the appointees, as 

indicated in the Certification of Assumption to Duty (CS Form 

No. 4, Series of 2017), shall be the basis for the payment of 

his/her salary and determination of service rendered in the 

government[t]. 

Xxx. 

 

Records showed that 124 faculty members were granted salary and YEB 

differentials covering the period July 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 as a result of the 

reclassification/modification of their positions per DBM NBC No. 461 – Seventh 

Evaluation. Said reclassification/modification was covered under DBM Notice of 

Organization, Staffing and Compensation Action (NOSCA) with Serial No. 0102019-

11-061 dated December 9, 2019 stating therein that Organization, Staffing Position 

and/or Compensation modifications were approved and effective not earlier than July 

1, 2019.  

 

On the Clarification on the Effectivity Date of Appointments in State 

Universities and Colleges based on the Implementation of DBM NBC No. 461, CSC 

Resolution No. 2000052 dated January 21, 2020 was issued which provides in the 

dispositive portion thereof the following: 

 



 

70 
 

xxx 

 

the Commission RESOLVES that the actual date of issuance of 

appointments shall be indicated below the signature of the 

appointing officer/authority in the appointment form, but the 

effectivity of reclassification to faculty positions in the SUCs 

shall be on July 1, 2019 based on the implementation of NBC 

No. 461 pursuant to the Special Provision of the Miscellaneous 

Personnel Benefits Fund in R.A. No. 10924.  

        

Audit of payrolls and its supporting documents, and verification of all 

appointees’ DTRs for the month of December 2019 disclosed that the reckoning/cut-

off date used in computing for such salary adjustments was “July 1, 2019,” the 

effectivity date of reclassification stated in said CSC Resolution, instead of, “December 

10, 2019,” the date of actual assumption of duties and oaths of office taken and/or upon 

return from official leave of absence, scholarship or training per Sections 17 and 23, 

Rule VI of the 2017 ORAOHRA (Revised 2018). It was noted that the appointments, 

certificates of actual assumption, and oaths of office were all dated December 10, 2019.  

 

Between the dates laid down in CSC Resolution No. 2000052 and Sections 17 

and 23, Rule VI of the 2017 ORAOHRA, the Audit Team is of the stand/interpretation, 

however, that the date per Sections 17 and 23, Rule VI of the 2017 ORAOHRA should 

prevail and be the basis for the payment of salary. After all, CSC Resolution No. 

2000052 provides only for the date given to SUCs to effect 

reclassification/modification to faculty positions and not to be construed, otherwise.   

 

Further review showed, that of the 124 appointees, only 94 appointees were 

actually present on December 10, 2019, whereas, the other 30 appointees were either 

on study leave, leave of absence, official travel, make-up duty and had no entries in 

their DTRs on December 10, 2019.  However, it was reflected in their Oaths of Office 

and Certificates of Assumption to Duty that the taking of oaths of office and assumption 

to duties and acknowledgment of appointments were all undertaken on December 10, 

2019 in the absence of a supporting evidence/document of their actual return from 

official leave of absence, scholarship or training as required under par. 2 of Section  17, 

Rule VI, 2017 ORAOHRA (Revised 2018), casting doubts on the authenticity and 

validity of the actual dates of assumption reported and non-determination of the 

overpaid salary and YEB differentials. 

 

The above-deficiencies were inconsistent with Sections 17 and 23, Rule VI of 

the 2017 ORAOHRA (Revised 2018), resulting in the overpayment of salary and YEB 

differentials in the total amount of ₱4,060,314.20. As there was overpayment of salary 

differentials covering the period July 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019, consequently, 

there was over-remittance of government’s shares in RLIP with the GSIS by 

₱570,032.37. 
 

 



 

71 
 

Breakdown of total overpayments of ₱4,630,346.57 is shown hereunder: 

 

Composition of Overpayment 
No. of 

Appointees 
Period 

Total  

(₱) 

Salary differential 78 7/1/19-12/09/19    3,085,663.46 

Salary and YEB differentials 16 7/1/19-12/31/19 543,628.80 

Salary, MYB, YEB differentials 7 7/1/19-12/09/19; 

7/19/19-10/3/19; 

 

  1/1/20-12/31/20 431,021.94 

Sub-Total 101  4,060,314.20 

GSIS employer’s shares in RLIP  101 7/1/19-12/9/19; 

1/1/20-12/31/20 

 

570,032.37 

Total   4,630,346.57 

 

We recommended that Management instruct the Head of HRMO to: 

  

a. Require those faculty who were on study leave; leave of absence; 
travel, and make-up duty who have returned for work after 

December 10, 2019 to rectify/correct the “December 10, 2019” date 

of assumption of duties and taking of oaths of office reported which 

shall be submitted to the Audit Team for evaluation, and 

 

b. Ensure that the dates of acknowledgment of appointment, 
assumption of duties and oaths of office reported by appointees 

were the actual dates such were undertaken and consistent with 

their entries in their DTRs. Henceforth, strictly adhere with 

Sections 17 and 23, Rule VI of the 2017 ORAOHRA (Revised 2018). 

 

Management commented that the CHED and DBM decided to implement the 

7th Cycle of DBM NBC No. 461 covering the period from July 1, 2013 to June 30, 

2016. As a result of evaluation, DBM issued NOSCA with Serial No. 0102019-11-061, 

dated December 9, 2019 stating therein that the same were approved and effective not 

earlier than July 1, 2019. The coverage of the 7th cycle of DBM NBC No. 461 was four 

years ago and its implementation has been severely delayed wherein faculty have 

waited patiently. As such, Management was confused on what effectivity date to be 

used. It was further emphasized that the implementation of DBM NBC No. 461 only 

involved increase in academic rank, and the duties of the faculty members are the same 

as that of their previous rank, thus, it could be construed that subject faculty have 

always actually assumed their duties since the retroactivity of the NOSCA, as affirmed 

in CSC Resolution No. 2000052. 

 

During the exit conference, the Director for Financial Services claimed that 

Management was in good faith when they paid for these salary differentials based from 

the instruction of the DBM. The Audit Team acknowledged the receipt of their 

comments and stated that the Audit Team maintains its stand on the audit 

recommendations. Further, Management was also apprised on the issuance of 

necessary Notice of Disallowance by the Audit Team for these transactions. 

 



 

72 
 

Under-assessed Income from Tuition and Medical/Dental Fees - ₱1,025,430.00 

 

15. Tuition and Medical/Dental Fees collected from Grades 1 to 12 students for the 
2nd term, AY 2019-2020 and 1st term, AY 2020-2021 were under-assessed, 

inconsistent with Board of Regents (BOR) Resolution Nos. 38, s. 2017 and 33, s. 

2014, respectively, resulting in the understatement of Income aggregating 

₱1,025,430.00. 

 

BOR Resolution No. 38, s. 2017 dated July 7, 2017 approved the request of 

the University to collect Tuition Fee from each laboratory grade school pupil 

and laboratory high school student of ₱7,500.00 and ₱8,750.00, respectively, 

effective School Year 2017-2018. On the other hand, BOR Resolution No. 33, s. 

2014 dated May 9, 2014 approved the request of the University to 

increase the Medical/Dental Fee to be collected from the students from ₱50.00 to 

₱100.00. 

 

Review of the tuition and other fees charged to Grades 1 to 10 students of 

the Laboratory School of the University for the 2nd term, AY 2019-2020 and 1st Term, 

AY 2020-2021 showed, that the amount of Tuition Fees assessed/collected were not in 

accordance with the amounts fixed by the BOR as per its Resolution No. 38, s. 2017 

for the total amounts of ₱7,500.00 for Grades 1 to 6, and ₱8,750.00 for Grades 7 to 10 

which should only cover for Tuition Fees, but, covers also Other School Fees, 

indicative of under-assessment. 

 

Furthermore, it was also noted that that the Medical/Dental Fee charged per 

student was only ₱40.00, instead of, ₱100.00 which was not in conformity with BOR 

Resolution No. 33, s. 2014. 

 

As a result of the under-assessments, Income collections were understated by 

₱1,025,430.00, broken down, as follows: 

 

Particulars   Amount  
(₱) 

Tuition Fees        953,190.00 

Medical and Dental Fees: 

    2nd Term AY 2019-2020         (595 enrollees x  P60.00) 

    1st Term AY 2020-2021          (609 enrollees x P60.00) 

 

 35,700.00 

36,540.00 

 

         

         72,240.00 

Total   1,025,430.00 

 

We recommended that Management instruct the Head of Accounting 

Office to demand collection of under-assessed Tuition and Medical/Dental 

Fees from concerned students, and set-up Accounts Receivable in the 

books. Henceforth, strictly adhere to BOR Resolution Nos. 38, s. 2017 and 33, s. 

2014. 

 

In their comments, Management conveyed their appreciation to the above audit 

observations pointing out inconsistencies with the real intents and purposes that caused 



 

73 
 

confusion between implementation and interpretation on the part of the Audit Team. 

Management emphasized that the title of said BOR Resolution is not in consonance 

with the intents and purposes of the request of the University to fix the amount of tuition 

and other fees to be collected from the Laboratory Grade School and High School 

students at ₱7,500.00 and ₱8,750.00, respectively as the intent and purpose of the 

resolution is clearly articulated in Paragraph 6 stating that, “ in order to sustain the 

operation of the UNP Laboratory School and in order to promote efficient and effective 

delivery of the basic education instruction, there is a need for parents to contribute for 

its operation by paying tuition and other fees”. From their end, the clear intention is to 

assess each Grade School and High School student at ₱7,500.00 and ₱8,750.00, 

respectively.  

 

It was explained further that the assessments showing breakdown of the 

composition of tuition and other fees were the pro-forma breakdown of fees covered 

for purposes of establishing the fixed amounts in coming up with the proposed fees as 

approved in the said BOR Resolution. Said assessments were carried-over until the 

issuance of the above observation. 

 

During the exit conference, the Director for Financial Services commented that 

if additional fees will be imposed/collected against students, parents will disagree and 

complain.  

 

However, to validate such claims, the Audit Team required the submission of 

proof on the composition of old tuition and other fees being collected before it was 

increased for evaluation. Pending the submission of said proof, it is of the Audit Team’s 

stand that true intention/purpose of said BOR Resolution as mentioned in our audit 

observation is in harmony with the Letter of the former SUC President to the Board of 

Regents dated June 29, 2017 requesting for authorization to collect tuition fee from 

each Laboratory Grade School pupil in the amount of ₱7,500.00 and from each 

Laboratory High School student in the amount of  ₱8,750.00, and the Letter of the 

Principal of Laboratory Schools dated June 16, 2017 to the former SUC President 

attaching a copy of Board Resolution that was deliberated and approved by the 

Administrative Council on May 12, 2017 and Minutes of the 2nd  PTA Meeting held on 

April 2, 2017. It was also noted in the said Minutes that the proposed tuition fees were 

exclusive of other fees, to wit:  

 

Then, he showed the breakdown of the proposed tuition fee for the 

Laboratory Schools. Upon enrolment, a total of ₱7,500.00 and 

₱8,750.00 will be collected from elementary and high school, 

respectively. In addition, miscellaneous fee and books are not included 

in the said amounts. 

 

 

 

 

 



 

74 
 

Doubtful Regularity and Propriety of Payments of Reimbursable TA - ₱117,000.00 

 

16. Claims for reimbursable TA of 12 designees of the University during the 
Enhanced Community Quarantine (ECQ) period totaling ₱117,000.00 were not 

supported with proper and complete documentation required under Section 286 

of Government Accounting and Auditing Manual (GAAM) Volume I and Section 

4(6), PD No. 1445, casting doubts on the regularity and propriety of the 

transaction. 

 

Section 286 of GAAM, Volume I, requires that reimbursable TA must be duly 

supported by receipts or by a certification to the effect that the expenses had been 

incurred in accordance with the purpose for which the allowance is granted. This is in 

conjunction with Section 4(6), PD No.1445 which states that “Claims against 

government funds shall be supported with complete documentation.” 

 

Pursuant to Proclamation No. 922, s. 2020 and 929, s.2020, the entire Luzon 

was placed under ECQ due to the emerge of corona virus disease 2019 last March 17, 

2020 until April 13, 2020, which was further extended until April 30,2020.  Under 

ECQ, among the guidelines laid down were: observance of strict home quarantine in 

all households where movement shall be limited to accessing basic necessities, and 

implementation of work from home arrangement in the Executive Branch, except the 

Philippine National Police, Armed Forces of the Philippines, Philippine Coast Guard 

and health and emergency frontline service, border control and other critical services, 

which shall ensure skeletal force.  

 

Records showed, that the University President has issued Memorandum No. 

2020-064 dated March 16, 2020 suspending work for teaching and non-teaching 

effective immediately in compliance with the ECQ guidelines. Simultaneously, 

Authority to Render Services during COVID-19 ECQ No. 2020-001 was also issued to 

personnel (non-teaching) who will render service from March 16, 2020 to 

April 30,2020.  

 

Post-audit of payroll for the payment of reimbursable TA to  12 designees of 

the University composed of Vice Presidents, Directors, and Deans during the ECQ 

(March 17, 2020 to April 30, 2020) revealed, that 100 percent TA corresponding to the 

actual workdays for every respective period was claimed during the entire duration of 

said ECQ based from Section 6.2.5 of DBM NBC No. 548 dated May 15, 2013, stating 

therein that suspension of work as declared by competent authority is construed as 

actual work performance. However, the propriety and regularity of said claim cast 

doubts due to the following: 

 

a) Certifications issued stating that the reimbursable TA was spent in 
the performance of their duties as recipients is unreliable considering 

that movement was limited only to accessing basic necessities and 

work from home arrangement has been implemented, except if the subject 

claimants were part of the skeletal force to render services during ECQ. 



 

75 
 

 

During the ECQ, claims for reimbursable TA would be best be evidenced 

by an invoice or receipt, and not a mere Certification.  

 

b) Of the 12 designees, only the Director for Financial Services was given 
Authority to Render Services During COVID 19 ECQ, however, with only 

four days were considered actual days reported, and 

 

c) Six designees whose daily time records (DTRs) were provided with “time 
in” and “time out” entries during ECQ period were not considered as 

their names were not in the list of personnel who were authorized to 

render services aside from deficiency noted under Item a above.   

 

Absence/non-submission of proper and complete documents required under 

Section 286 of GAAM Volume I and Section 4(6), PD No. 1445 cast doubts on the 

regularity and propriety of the transaction amounting to ₱117,000.00. 

 

We recommended Management to instruct concerned TA recipients/Head 

of Accounting Office to submit receipts supporting incurrence of TA where work 

was suspended or under work from home arrangement as required under Section 

286 of GAAM Volume I, and other supporting documents as required under 

Section 4(6), PD No. 1445. 

 

During the exit conference, the Director for Financial Services justified that 

their decision to pay their TA was based form the guidelines of RATA in which 

suspension of work is construed as actual rendition of work. The SUC President then 

claimed that despite that Authority to Render Service during ECQ was not issued to 

some officers who still reported for work, they still risked their lives coming to the 

University.  
 

The Audit Team then requested the submission of necessary documents for 

evaluation and to substantiate said claims. 

 

 

Irregular Payments of Mid-Year Bonus (MYB) and CNAI to Faculty Under Scholarship 
 

17. MYB and CNAI in the aggregate amount of ₱584,316.00 were granted to faculty 
on full-time study leave despite ineligibility and/or non-rendition of actual 

performance of duties in violation of Sections 4.2 and 4.3 of DBM BC No. 2019-4, 

and Sections 1.2 and 4.4.4 of DBM BC No. 2020-5, rendering the transactions 

irregular. 
 

Section 4.0 of DBM BC No. 2019-4 dated July 6, 2019, known as Clarification 

on the Grant of MYB to Government Employees states: 
 

Officials and employees who are on authorized attendance in a 

scholarship grant or program on official time may be given the  



 

76 
 

 

Mid-Year Bonus, subject to the following guidelines:  
 

xxx 

 

4.2 A scholar who has rendered at least four (4) months of actual 
performance of duties with at least a satisfactory rating for 

the period of July 1 of the immediately preceding year to 

May 15 of the current year, and still in the service as of May 

15 of the current year may be entitled to the Mid-Year 

Bonus. Actual performance of duties means that the 

employee is reporting for work and actually delivering the 

services required of his/her position. 
 

4.3 A scholar with less than four (4) months of actual 

performance of duties for the period of July 1 of the 

immediately preceding year to May 15 of the current year, 

and still in the service as of May 15 of the current year may 

be entitled to the Mid-Year Bonus, subject to the successful 

completion of the course program and fulfillment of the 

conditions stipulated in the scholarship contrac[t]. 

       

On the other hand, Sections 1.2 and 4.4.4 of DBM BC No. 2020-5 dated 

November 4, 2020 which provide the guidelines on the grant of the CNAI FY 2020 

state: 
 

1.2 Item (4)(h)(ii)(aa) of the Congress Joint Resolution (JR) 

No. 4, s. 2009,  institutionalizes the grant of CNA 

Incentive as a form of reward to motivate employee 

efforts toward higher productivity, to wit: 

  
 (aa) Collective Negotiation Agreement (CNA) Incentive – 

This may be granted to both management and rank-and-

file employees of agencies with approved and 

successfully implemented CNAs in recognition of their 

efforts in accomplishing performance targets at lesser 

cost, in attaining more efficient and viable operations 

through cost-cutting measures and systems improvement 

xxx. 

  

4.2.2 The CNA Incentive may be given equally to all qualified 

employees under Item 3.0 hereof or at varying rates in 

consideration of the employee’s or his/her office’s 

contribution to the accomplishment of performance 

targets, efficiency, productivity, or profitability, as 

determined by the agency head upon recommendation of 



 

77 
 

the Employee’s Organization-Management Consultative 

Committee. 

  
Audit of benefits granted to officials and employees of the University showed, 

that CY 2020 MYB equivalent to one month basic salary in the total amount of 

₱250,984.00 was paid to nine faculty on full time study leave despite ineligibility for 

failure to meet qualifications set-forth under Sections 4.2 and 4.3 of DBM Circular No. 

2019-4. Based from the data gathered, no actual performance of duties was rendered 

by said faculty for at least four months with satisfactory rating for the semester ending 

December 2019.  

 

On the other hand, 15 faculty were paid the full amount of CNAI of ₱25,000.00  

each, wherein 11 faculty should have not been paid for having not rendered actual 

performance of duties geared towards the University’s performance targets through 

cost-cutting measures and systems improvement as they were still on study leave 

during the 2nd term of AY 2019-2020 and 1st term of AY 2020-2021, and four faculty 

who returned and assumed in June and August 2020 should have been paid in 

proportion to the actual services rendered which was not in conformity with Sections 

1.2 and 4.4.4 of DBM BC No. 2020-5.  

 

In view thereof, payments of MYB and CNAI aggregating ₱584,316.00 granted 

to faculty of full-time study leave which were not in conformance with above-

provisions, cast doubt on the regularity of disbursements.   

 

We recommended that Management direct the Heads of HRMO and 

Accounting Office to ensure that MYB and CNAI are paid only to eligible faculty 

members on full-time study leave and to pro-rate the CNAI to be granted to 

faculty who returned during the year of grant corresponding to the actual service 

rendered in strict adherence with Sections 4.2 and 4.4 of DBM BC No. 2019-4 and 

Sections 1.2 and 4.4.4.of DBM BC No. 2020-5. 
 

During the exit conference, the Human Resource Management Officer IV 

commented that they have followed the guidelines as to the grant of CNAI and that 

these concerned employees have continued paying their dues to the association. She 

also claimed that based from the scholarship contracts between subject faculty and 

CHED, they are entitled to benefits and privileges. 
 

The Audit Team explained that said faculty is entitled if they are eligible. CNA 

Incentives requires actual service and as regards MYB, DBM has issued clarificatory 

guidelines to address the issue. Management was also informed that COA ROI has 

rendered a decision which denied the appeal of an SUC pertaining to said benefits 

granted to scholars. Thus, the Audit Team will be constrained to issue the necessary 

Notices of Disallowance. 

 

 

 



 

78 
 

Excess Payments of Hazard Pay to Public Health Workers (PHWs) - ₱227,659.39 
 

18. Hazard Pay granted to seven PHWs under the University’s Hospital and Medical 
Services Office was excessive by ₱227,659.39 which was not in conformity with the 

rates prescribed under Section 21 of RA No. 7305, Section 7.1.5 (a) of the IRR of 

RA No. 7305 and Section 7.2.1 of DBM-DOH Joint Circular (JC) No. 1, s. 2012, 

rendering the transaction irregular. 

 

Section 21 of RA No. 7305, the Magna Carta of PHWs states: 
 

Hazard Allowance. – Public health workers in hospitals, xxx, 

clinics and other health-related establishments located in 

difficult areas, strife-torn or embattled areas, distressed or 

isolated stations, prisons camps, mental hospitals, radiation-

exposed clinics, laboratories or disease-infested areas or in 

areas declared under state of calamity or emergency for the 

duration thereof which expose them to great danger, contagion, 

radiation, volcanic activity/eruption, occupational risks or 

perils to life as determined by the Secretary of Health of the 

Head of the unit with the approval of the Secretary of Health, 

shall be compensated hazard allowances equivalent to at least 

twenty-five (25%) of the monthly basic salary of health 

workers receiving salary grade 19 and below, and five percent 

(5%) for health workers with salary grade 20 and above. 
 

Section 7.1.5(a) of the IRR of RA No. 7305 provides: 
 

Public health workers shall be compensated hazard allowances 

equivalent to at least twenty-five (25%) of the monthly basic 

salary of health workers, receiving salary grade 19 and below, 

and five percent (5%) for health workers with salary grade 20 

and above. This may be granted on a monthly, quarterly or 

annual basis. 

 

Section 7.2.1 of DBM-DOH Joint Circular (JC) No. 1, s. 2012 states: 

 

For PHWs whose positions are at SG-19 and below, Hazard Pay 

shall be based on [t]he number of workdays of actual exposure 

over 22 working days, in a month at rates not to exceed 25% of 

monthly basic salary. In case of exposure to both high risk and 

low risk hazards, the Hazard Pay for the month shall be based 

on only one risk level, whichever is more advantageous to the 

PHW.   

 

 

 

 



 

79 
 

                   Level  

                         of Risk 

    Actual 

Exposure 

 

High Risk 

 

Low Risk 

12 or more days 25% of monthly basic salary 14% of monthly basic salary 

6 to 11 days 14% of monthly basic salary  8% of monthly basic salary 

Less than 6 days   8% of monthly basic salary  5% of monthly basic salary 

 

Audit of payrolls for Hazard Pay of PHWs of the University’s Hospital and 

Medical Services Office for the period January to December 2020 disclosed, that seven 

PHWs (five from the Hospital and two from Medical Services Office) with Salary 

Grades 20 and above claimed Hazard Pay with rates ranging from 11% to 15% of their 

monthly basic salary, instead of, 5% pursuant to Section 21 of RA No. 7305 and Section 

7.1.5(a) of the IRR of RA No. 7305.  

 

Furthermore, in March 2020, the Hazard Pay claimed by three PHWs under the 

Medical Services Office with salary grade level 19 and below were based from the 25% 

rate corresponding to 12 or more days of actual exposure, instead of, 14% as their actual 

workdays/exposure were below 12 days in view of the suspension of work during the 

ECQ, which was not in conformity with Section 7.2.1 of DBM-DOH JC No. 1, s. 2012. 
 

The rates used by Management in computing for the hazard pay were in excess 

of those prescribed under Section 21 of RA No. 7305, Section 7.1.5(a) of the IRR of 

RA No. 7305, and Section 7.2.1 of DBM-DOH JC No. 1, s. 2012, consequently, 

computed claims were excessive by ₱227,659.39, broken down as follows: 

 

Particulars 
Amount 

(₱) 

Excessive Payment of Hazard Pay to PHWs (Medical  

     Services Office and Hospital) 219,892.09 

Excessive Payment of Hazard Pay to PHWs under the  

     Medical Services Office during ECQ Period 7,767.30 

 227,659.39 

  

We recommended that Management instruct the Payroll Officer and Head 

of Accounting Office to compute Hazard Pay of PHWs in accordance with Section 

21 of RA No. 7305, Section 7.1.5 (a) of the IRR of RA No. 7305 and Section 7.2.1 

of DBM-DOH JC No. 1, s. 2012. 

 

During the exit conference, the Audit Team informed Management that 

payments for such claims would be subject of ND.  

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

80 
 

C. Other Areas 
 

Gender and Development (GAD) 

 

Management has substantially complied with the requirements of Section 1 of 

EO No. 273, Section 32, of the GAA of FY 2020, PCW-NEDA-DBM Joint Circular 

No. 2012-01. For CY 2020, the University has allocated the amount of ₱74,575,500.00 

or 7.96 percent of its total budget for its GAD-related programs, activities and projects 

and was able to implement 76.71 percent of its GAD Plan and Budget or 

₱57,206,037.35.  

 

Disaster Risk Reduction and Management (DRRM) 

 

For CY 2020, the University conducted the following DRRM programs and 

activities with total amount of ₱252,368.60 has been allocated and spent, to wit: 

 

Activities Venue Date Implemented 
Amount 

Incurred 

 Psychological First Aid 
Training 

Vigan City 

Trade Center 

09/30/20, 10/16/20, 

10/23/20 

47,000.00 

 OPLAN UNDAS – 
Augmentation to Vigan City 

Vigan City 

Cemetery 

10/15-28/20,  

11/5-20/20 

47,250.00 

 Skills Training on Face 
Shield Making 

Caoayan 

National High 

School 

11/26/20 4,300.00 

 Skills Training on Face 
Shield Making 

Bulag National 

High School 

12/02/20 6,400.00 

 Skills Training on Face 
Shield Making 

Bulag 

Elementary 

School 

11/27/20 6,800.00 

 Skills Training on Face 
Shield Making 

San Esteban 

National High 

School 

11/25/20 6,400.00 

 Water Safety and Survival 
Training 

Mira Hills and 

San Pedro 

Vigan 

11/19-21/20 67,650.00 

 University Emergency 
Responders Training 

UNP Gym 09/09-10/20 41,360.00 

 Skills Training on Face 
Shield Making 

Brgy. 

Ambulugan, 

Narvacan 

08/27/20 4,100.00 

 Skills Training on Face 
Shield Making 

Mindoro 

Elementary 

School 

08/20/20 2,800.00 

 Skills Training on Face 
Shield Making 

Pudoc 

Elementary 

School 

08/14/20 2,300.00 



 

81 
 

Activities Venue Date Implemented 
Amount 

Incurred 

 Skills Training on Face 
Shield Making 

San Sebastian 

National High 

School 

08/20/20 5,700.00 

 Participation to the National 
Disaster Resilience Month 

UNP 07/03/20 512.00 

 Information Drive on 
Typhoon Preparedness 

measures during rainy season 

Various LGUs 06/10,11,15,16/20 

 

9,796.60 

Total   252,368.60 
 

 

Compliance with Tax Laws 

 

For CY 2020, the University was able to withhold taxes on compensation 

income from progress and final payments of infrastructure projects, purchases of goods 

and services, and salaries and wages of employees in the total amount of 

₱46,983,230.39 of which the amount of ₱44,672,652.91 was remitted during the year 

leaving an unremitted balance of ₱2,310,577.48 which was remitted in January 2021.      
          

       

Compliance with GSIS Premium Deductions and Remittances 

 

GSIS Retirement and Life Insurance Premiums (RLIP) and Loan Payments 

withheld during the year amounted to ₱50,968,124.66, of which the amount of 

₱47,980,676.04 was remitted in CY 2020 leaving an unremitted balance of 

₱2,987,448.62 which was remitted in January 2021.         
     
 

Compliance with Pag-IBIG Fund Contributions 
 

Pag-IBIG contributions and loan payments withheld during the year amounted 

to ₱4,381,489.78, of which the amount of ₱4,089,273.58 was remitted in CY 2020 

leaving an unremitted balance of ₱292,216.20 which was remitted in January 2021. 
 

 

Compliance with PhilHealth Contributions 
 

Philhealth contributions and loan payments withheld during the year amounted 

to ₱3,854,841.83, of which the amount of ₱3,599,081.72 was remitted in CY 2020 

leaving an unremitted balance of ₱255,760.11 which was remitted in January 2021. 
 

 

Compliance with Property Insurance Law 
 

The University has insured all of its insurable properties with the GSIS in 

compliance with RA No. 656, otherwise known as the “Property Insurance Law”, as 

amended by PD No. 245 dated July 13, 1973. 



 

82 
 

Status of Settlement of Audit Suspensions, Disallowances and Charges 
 

Audit suspensions, disallowances and charges for the CY 2020 is summarized 

in the Table below: 
 

 Suspensions Disallowances Charges 

Balance, January 1, 2020  -   16,846,928.75  - 

Add:  Suspensions, Disallowances and  

          Charges during the year 

- 1,094,551.83 - 

Total - 17,941,480.58 - 

Less: Settlements made during the year  - 42,834.13  - 

Balance, December 31, 2020                      -   17,898,646.45  - 

 

Below are the details of the disallowances: 
 

Notice of Disallowance 
                       Amount 

                         (₱) 

With LSS Decision 790,126.19 

With COA Order of Execution 2,151,200.35 

With Notice of Finality of Decision 141,909.94 

With Petition for Review 10,284,395.97 

With Automatic Review  3,266,671.30 

With Appeal  353,538.73 

With Approved Request for Payment By Installments 192,625.00 

Within the Period to File Appeal 718,178.97 

Total 17,898,646.45 



 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PART III 

 

STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION 

OF PRIOR YEARS’ AUDIT 

RECOMMENDATIONS 
 

 

 

 

 



 

83 
 

STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF PRIOR YEARS’ AUDIT 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

 

 Of the 34 audit recommendations contained in the CYs 2019, 2018 and 2017 

Annual Audit Reports, 20 were implemented and 14 were not implemented. 

 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

AAR 2019    

The reliability, accuracy and 

existence of “Property, Plant 

and Equipment” accounts 

with recorded cost of 

₱1,307,768,003.36 could not 

be ascertained due incomplete 

conduct of inventory and non-

preparation of updated Report 

of the Physical Count of 

Property Plant and Equipment 

(RPCPPE) showing an 

unreconciled variance 

between book balance and 

RPCPPE’s of 

₱1,154,724,757.61, and net 

discrepancies between the 

General Ledgers (GLs) and 

Subsidiary Ledgers (SLs) of 

₱9,509,093.68, affecting the 

fairness of the University’s 

financial statements. 

 

We recommended that 

Management: 

1. Require the Inventory 
Committee to conduct 

complete physical 

inventory of all properties 

at least once a year and the 

results of the physical 

count be prepared in 

RPCPPE which shall be 

reconciled with the 

accounting records as 

required in Sections 4 and 

42 Physical inventory 

count is still on-going. 

 

The VP for Finance 

and Administration has 

directed the Inventory 

Committee to speed up 

the completion and 

finalization of the 

RPCPPE for 

reconciliation with the 

accounting records.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Not Implemented 

 

Related discussion 

under Observation 

No. 2 of this report. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

84 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

5.4 of COA Circular No. 

80-124, and 

 

2. Instruct the Accounting 
Office to reconcile its 

supporting 

schedules/Property Ledger 

Cards and GLs in 

conformity with Section 

111 of P.D. No. 1445. 

 

 

 

Not Implemented 

As per validation, 

some SL accounts do 

not tally with the GL 

balances. 

 

Cash advances in the total 

amount of ₱3,993,964.22 

remained unliquidated as of 

the end of the year which was 

not in conformity with 

Sections 4.1.3, 5.7 and 5.8 of 

COA Circular No. 97-002 and 

Section 119 of PD No. 1445, 

thus, expenses incurred were 

not taken up in the books of 

accounts, resulting in the 

understatement “Expenses” 

and overstatement of 

“Income” by ₱3,993,964.22, 

affecting the fairness of 

presentation of the financial 

statements. 

 

We recommended that 

Management: 

3. Instruct the Finance 
Office to closely monitor 

the timely liquidation of 

cash advances especially 

at the end of the year and 

demand liquidation 

thereof in order to fairly 

present financial 

information in the 

financial statements. 

 

4. Consider payment of 
salaries, honoraria and 

44 Close monitoring of 

liquidation of cash 

advances especially 

towards year-end. 

 

The VPAA has issued 

memorandum 

requiring all 

contractual and part-

time faculty members 

without LBP ATM to 

open an account with 

LBP and become a pre-

employment 

requirement. 

 

Said policy is strictly 

implemented by the 

University. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Implemented 

 

Timely liquidation of 

cash advances was 

done by the Finance 

Office as per 

validation with the 

Liquidation Reports 

submitted. 

 

 

Implemented 

 



 

85 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

other similar payments be 

made through ATM 

Payroll System as what 

was being employed to 

permanent, other 

contractual, part-time and 

emergency employees in 

order to minimize, if not 

avoid, the untimely 

liquidation of cash 

advances, and 

 

5. Henceforth, strictly 
adhere to Sections 4.1.3, 

5.7 and 5.8 of COA 

Circular No. 97-002 and 

Section 119 of P.D. 1445. 

Payments of salaries 

honoraria and other 

similar payments 

were already through 

ATM Payroll 

System. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Implemented 

 

No unliquidated 

cash advances as of 

the end of the year. 

Eligible student beneficiaries 

of the Free Higher Education 

Provision were charged four 

additional school fees ranging 

from ₱230-₱240, despite 

express prohibition under 

Section 61, Rule X of IRR of 

RA No. 10931, while non-

eligible student beneficiaries 

were charged three school 

fees ranging from ₱30-₱40 

without the approval of the 

Board of Regents, in violation 

of Section 4(d) of RA 8292, 

resulting in unauthorized 

collections. 

 

We recommended that 

Management: 

6. Direct the Finance Office 
to discontinue charging 

and collecting 

unauthorized school fees 

from students in order to 

conform with the 

provisions of Section 61, 

46 Collection of Quality 

Assurance Fee, Girls 

Scout of the 

Philippines, Philippine 

Red Cross and ID 

validation fees were 

discontinued effective 

Second Term of SY 

2019-2020 and 

onwards. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Implemented 

 

Validation of fees 

assessed during the 

second term, AY 

2020-2021 showed 

that subject fees were 



 

86 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

of the IRR of RA 10931 

and Section 4 (d) of RA 

8292, and 

 

7. Work-out with the 
UniFAST Board the 

inclusion of Quality 

Assurance Fee from 

among the miscellaneous 

and other fees being 

currently collected, if 

warranted. 

already 

discontinued. 

 

 

Implemented 

 

Overtaken by events 

as the issue was 

elevated to the 

PASUC and since 

said fees were not 

common fees 

collected by all 

SUCs in the country, 

the matter was not 

endorsed by 

Management with 

the UniFAST Board. 

Assessed tuition and other 

fees of 43 foreign students 

were paid through direct 

deposit to the account of the 

University in violation of 

procedures cited in the UNP 

Citizen’s Charter on 

Collection of School Fees on 

Tuition and other 

Matriculation Fees, resulting 

in overpayments of 

₱2,448,428.29, of which, 

were eventually refunded by 

the University. 

 

8. We recommended that 
Management stop the 

practice of allowing 

foreign students deposit 

payments of tuition and 

other fees to the account 

of the University.  

Henceforth, strictly 

adhere to the provisions of 

University Citizen’s 

48 Issuance of 

Memorandum No. 

2020-001 dated 

January 2, 2020 was 

issued directing 

concerned Heads of 

Academic Units to 

meet all foreign 

students enrolled in 

their respective 

College to remind 

them to cease and 

desist from depositing 

directly to the account 

of the University in 

LBP Vigan Branch. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Implemented 

Due to the pandemic 

situation, the 

University allowed 

students (foreign and 

Filipino) to directly 

deposit their 

payments/balances 

to the LBP account 

of the University. 



 

87 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

Charter on collection of 

tuition and other 

matriculation fees in order 

not to make the University 

act as a remittance center 

without authority of law. 

Overtime services rendered 

by faculty members on 

weekends for the preparation 

in the accreditation of the 

different programs and 

institutions of the University 

were remunerated through 

the grant of meals and snacks, 

and transportation allowances 

of ₱250 per day in the total 

amount of ₱586,743.38 for 

the period February 2018 to 

July 2019, instead of, either 

through Compensatory Time-

Off or Overtime Pay as 

provided for under Section 

3.0 of DBM Circular No. 02, 

s. 2015, casting doubts on the 

regularity and/or propriety of 

the transactions. 

 

9. We recommended that 
Management properly 

remunerate the overtime 

services to be rendered by 

faculty members who are 

duly authorized to render 

overtime services with 

pay, except teaching 

overloads as it is covered 

by other compensation 

rules, through CTO 

pursuant to Section 3 of 

DBM NBC No. 46.  

50 Payment of meals and 

snacks allowance to 

remunerate overtime 

services rendered by 

faculty has been 

stopped. 

 

Adopted policy on 

proper remuneration of 

overtime services was 

duly disseminated and 

agreed upon during the 

Administrative 

Council effective 

August 27, 2020. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Implemented 

 

Validation/ post-

audit showed that 

payments of meals 

and snacks, and 

transportation 

allowance to 

remunerate overtime 

services have been 

discontinued. 

 

Claims of five non-teaching 

grantees under the Faculty 

and Staff Development 

52 Charging of 

scholarship expenses 

incurred by non-

 

 

 



 

88 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

Program (FSDP) of the 

University representing 

tuition fees, thesis aids and 

defense fees in the total 

amount of ₱176,731.94 were 

charged against FSD Fund 

(Use of Income) which was 

not in accordance with 

Section 6 of CMO No. 20 S. 

2011, rendering the 

transactions irregular. 

 

We recommended that 

Management: 

 

10. Discontinue charging the 
claims of non-faculty 

scholarship grantees from 

the Faculty and Staff 

Development Fund to 

conform with the 

provisions of Section 6, 

No. 20, Series of 2011, 

and  

 

 

11. For the proper funding of 
scholarship expenses, 

instruct the Budget 

Officer to allocate budget 

for the scholarship grants 

of non-teaching personnel 

grantees under 

Scholarship 

Grants/Expenses account 

of the General 

Appropriations Act or 

Fund 01. 

teaching employee- 

grantees has been 

stopped. 

Claims of non-

teaching employee-

grantees were now 

funded in GAA under 

Training and 

Scholarship 

Grants/Expenses 

allotment.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Implemented 

 

Validation showed 

the claims of that 

non-faculty 

scholarship grantees 

were no longer 

charged against the 

Faculty and Staff 

Development Fund. 

 

Implemented 

 

As per verification, 

scholarship grants of 

non-teaching 

personnel were 

budgeted under 

Scholarship Grant/ 

Expenses account of 

the GAA. 

Expenses charged against the 

Petty Cash Funds under the 

different types of Funds of the 

University were not 

supported with basic 

55 The process flowchart 

on requests for the 

utilization of PCF has 

been updated and 

strictly followed. 

 

 

 

 

 



 

89 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

documentary requirements 

required under Section 1.2.2 

of COA Circular 2012-001 

and Section 36 (c) of GAM 

for NGAS, Volume I, casting 

doubt on the regularity of the 

disbursements. 

 

We recommended that 

Management: 

12. Require the Finance 
Office to update its 

established policies on the 

utilization of Petty Cash 

Fund in conformity with 

the provisions of Section 

36 (c) of GAM for NGAs, 

Volume I  and Section 

1.2.2 of COA Circular 

No. 2012-001 in order to 

cast away doubt on the 

regularity of the petty 

cash transactions, and 

 

13. Instruct the Cashier to 
require all the applicable 

documentary 

requirements before the 

effecting the payment of 

petty cash charges out of 

the PCF to requesting 

employees, and the use of 

the Inspection and 

Acceptance Report form 

prescribed under Section 

17(j) of GAM for NGAs 

Volume I. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Implemented 

 

Validation showed 

that the policies on 

the utilization of PCF 

were updated and 

aligned with Section 

36(c), GAM for 

NGAs, Volume I and 

Section 1.2.2 of 

COA Circular No. 

2012-001. 

 

 

Implemented 

 

Expenses charged 

against PCF were 

already supported 

with basic 

supporting 

documents. 

The Infrastructure Project 

“Continuation of the 

Construction of Technology 

Complex” of the University 

with a cost of ₱36,645,877.51 

was awarded to an 

 Management has 

undertaken the 

following actions: 

 

1. Justifications were 
submitted to the 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

90 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

unqualified bidder whose 

financial bid was found non-

responsive, in violation of 

Section 32.2.1 of The 2016 

Revised IRR of R.A. 9184, 

rendering the procurement 

illegal. 

 

We recommended that 

Management: 

14. Require the BAC to 
submit explanations/ 

justifications for failure to 

evaluate, determine the 

completeness of the bids 

of said Contractor 

responsive to the 

requirements of Section 

32.2.1 of The 2016 

Revised IRR of R.A. 

9184, and remissness 

from disqualifying said 

Bidder as required by the 

above provision of law.  

The BAC is required, 

further, to justify why 

they should not be 

charged for their 

omissions in accordance 

with the provisions of 

R.A. 9184; 

  

15. Instruct the TWG and 
BAC to ensure that the 

procedures prescribed 

under The 2016 Revised 

IRR of RA 9184 and 

GPPB Manual of 

Procedures for the 

Procurement of 

Infrastructure Projects in 

the conduct of opening of 

Audit Team. Meeting 

was held between the 

President, Legal 

Officer and the BAC 

to determine the 

appropriate course of 

action to deal with 

the erring personnel. 

Show cause orders 

were issued in the 

last week of August 

2020. Investigation 

followed thereafter 

to determine who 

shall be held 

accountable and 

liable. 

 

2. The Legal Officer’s 
result of evaluation 

on the replies to the 

show cause order 

suggested that the 

decision will be 

penalty of reprimand 

to those found to 

have erred in the 

process. 

 

3. The BAC conducted 
a meeting with the 

concerned 

Contractor last 

February 28, 2020 to 

discuss the audit 

observation and the 

decision to rescind 

the contract.  

 

BAC recommended 

to the Board of 

Regents (HoPE) for 

the rescission of the 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Not Implemented 

 

Explanations were 

submitted and 

evaluated. 

 

The proof of final 

decision/ action 

against concerned 

BAC members were 

not yet submitted to 

the Audit Team as of 

report writing date. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Not Implemented 

 

Related discussion 

under Observation 

No. 10 of this Report.  

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

91 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

bids be strictly observed, 

and 

 

16. Direct the Internal 
Control Office to review 

the processes conducted 

by the BAC during bid 

opening to identify the 

lapses made in the 

processes and determine 

the appropriate actions to 

address the same in order 

to avoid the occurrence of 

similar omissions. 

Contract on 

Continuation of the 

Construction of the 

Technology 

Complex awarded to 

JLP Construction 

and Supply which 

was approved as per 

BOR Resolution No. 

78-B, s. 2020. 

 

Pursuant to said BOR 

Resolution, Notice of 

Rescission dated 

September 7, 2020 

was sent to the 

Contractor on 

September 9, 2020 

through registered 

mail.  

 

4. The Internal Control 
Office have reviewed 

and evaluated the 

process flow of the 

BAC on Bid Opening 

and submitted their 

recommendation to 

the President for 

review and 

documentations for 

ISO purposes. 

 

 

 

Implemented 

 

Validation showed 

that the Internal 

Control Office has 

reviewed and 

evaluated the bid 

opening process 

conducted by the 

BAC. 

 

The procurement of 

Laboratory Equipment with 

total contract cost of 

₱31,304,000.00 million was 

not in accordance with 

provisions under The 2016 

Revised IRR of RA 9184 and 

Section 4.2.5 of GPPB 

Circular No. 02-2018, 

resulting in an illegal and 

irregular transaction.   

60 Management 

submitted explanations 

and relevant 

documents on their 

non-compliance and 

why they should not be 

charged accordingly. 

Meeting was held 

between the President, 

Legal Officer and the 

BAC to determine the 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

92 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

 

We recommended that 

Management:  

 

17. Instruct the BAC, BAC 
Secretariat and TWG to 

submit explanations on 

their non-compliance 

with the afore-cited 

provisions of the 2016 

Revised IRR of RA 9184 

and why they could not be 

charged accordingly from 

violations thereof; 

 

 

 

18. Require the Accounting 
Office and/or the BAC to 

submit the above-

enumerated lacking 

documents as required 

under Appendix A of 

Annex “H” of the Revised 

IRR of RA 9184; and 

 

19. Direct the BAC, BAC 
Secretariat and TWG to 

strictly adhere to the 

processes, procedures and 

timelines prescribed 

under The 2016 Revised 

IRR of RA 9184 and 

Section 4.2.5 of GPPB 

Circular No. 02-2018. 

appropriate course of 

action to deal with the 

erring personnel. Show 

cause orders were 

issued in the last week 

of August 2020. 

 

Subsequently, 

investigation was 

conducted to 

determine accountable 

and liable employees. 

The Legal Officer 

evaluated the replies to 

the show cause 

suggests that the 

decision will be a 

penalty of reprimand 

to those found to have 

erred in the process. 

 

The BAC, BAC 

Secretariat and TWG, 

in their best efforts, 

strictly observe the 

processes, procedures 

and timelines 

prescribed under the 

2016 Revised IRR of 

RA 9184 and Section 

4.2.5 of GPPB Circular 

No. 02-2018. 

 

 

 

 

 

Implemented 

 

Explanations were 

submitted and 

evaluated. The proof 

of action/ decision by 

Management against 

the BAC, BAC 

Secretariat and TWG 

remained 

unsubmitted as of 

report writing date. 

 

Implemented 

 

Lacking documents 

were submitted and 

verified and found in 

order. 

 

 

 

Not Implemented 

 

Related discussion 

under Observation 

No. 3 of this Report 

The BAC and the TWG 

failed to post-disqualify 

winning bidders in four 

projects of the University 

with contract cost 

aggregating 

₱99,883,259.57 for non-

disclosure of awarded and 

65 The BAC and TWG 

already adopted the 

use of PhilGEPS Open 

Data. 

 

The BAC required the 

Contractors to submit 

justifications why they 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

93 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

on-going projects with the 

University and other 

government agencies, in 

violation of Sections 34.3 

and  25.3 (c) of The 2016 

Revised IRR of RA 9184, 

resulting in the award of 

contracts to non-compliant 

bidders. 

 

We recommended that 

Management: 

20. In its succeeding 
procurements, instruct the 

BAC and the TWG to 

ensure strict adherence 

with Section 25.3 of the 

2016 Revised IRR of RA 

9184, in the conduct of 

post-qualification to 

include, validation of the 

Statement of On-going 

Projects through the use 

of PhilGEPS Open Data 

website.  

 

21. Impose upon concerned 
Contractors, if warranted, 

the penalty of suspension 

without prejudice to the 

imposition of additional 

administrative sanctions 

as the internal rules of the 

agency may provide 

and/or further criminal 

prosecution, as provided 

by applicable law, and 

forfeiture of 

bid/performance posted 

by the concerned bidder in 

addition to the penalty of 

suspension, pursuant to 

Section 69.1 and 69.2 

should not be 

penalized. Upon 

review of their 

justifications, the BAC 

recommended for the 

temporary suspension 

of the subject 

Contractors from 

participating in any 

procurement of the 

University which was 

approved by the SUC 

President and endorsed 

to the Board of 

Regents for approval. 

 

The subject 

Contractors were 

suspended by the 

University for one year 

effective March 2020. 

 

The Internal Control 

Office has already 

evaluated the process 

flow on post-

qualification and 

submitted the results of 

their evaluation to the 

President for review 

and documentation for 

ISO purposes. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Implemented 

 

No similar audit 

observations were 

noted during the year 

under audit. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Not Implemented 

 

Required the 

submission of 

Notices of 

Suspension served to 

concerned 

Contractors but to no 

avail. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

94 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

respectively, of the 2016  

Revised IRR of RA 9184. 

 

22. Direct the Internal 
Control Office to evaluate 

the process of post-

qualification conducted 

by the BAC and TWG to 

determine the lapses in the 

processes undertaken and 

take action to address the 

same to avoid the 

repetition of awarding of 

contracts to 

unqualified/non-

compliant bidders. 

 

 

 

Implemented 

 

As per validation, 

the Internal Control 

Office has 

conducted 

evaluation of the 

post-qualification 

process conducted 

by the BAC. 

 

The periods of issuance of 

Notice of Award (NOA) from 

the determination of the 

bidder with the lowest/single 

calculated and responsive 

bid, and action from bid 

opening to issuance of NOA 

as prescribed under Sections 

37.1.2, 37.1.3 and 38.1 of The 

2016 Revised IRR of R.A. 

9184 were not strictly 

observed, resulting in the 

delay in the delivery of goods 

and completion of 

infrastructure projects thus, 

affecting the efficiency of the 

University in its procurement 

undertakings. 

 

23. We recommended that 
Management bring to the 

attention of the Board of 

Regents to resolve its 

failure to observe the 

timelines in granting 

authority to the SUC 

President to issue Notice 

69 The observation was 

elevated to the Board 

of Regents to address 

the observation 

wherein it was 

resolved during its 1st 

Quarter Regular 

Meeting on March 11, 

2020 that the President 

can request for a 

Special BOR meeting 

anytime there will be 

procurement contracts 

to be awarded. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Not Implemented 

 

Related discussion 

under Observation 

No. 3 of this report 



 

95 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

of Award, Notice to 

Proceed and to enter into a 

contract as prescribed 

under Sections 37.1.2, 

37.1.3 and38.1 of the 

Revised IRR of RA 9184 

for the timely delivery of 

goods and completion of 

infrastructure projects, 

thus, achieving efficiency 

in its procurement 

undertakings. 

Procurements of merchandise 

for sale by the Groceria de la 

Universidad, an IGP of the 

University, in the total 

amount of ₱5,560,865.29 

were not in accordance with 

the provisions and 

documentations prescribed 

under applicable provisions 

of R.A. 9184 and its IRR, and 

Section 9.2 of COA Circular 

No. 2012-001, casting doubts 

on the validity and regularity 

of the transactions.  

 

We recommended that 

Management: 

24. Instruct the 
BAC/Procurement Unit  

to strictly observe the 

procurement procedures, 

processes and 

documentations 

prescribed under the 

applicable provisions of 

R.A. 9184, particularly on 

the guidelines under 

Alternative Method of 

Procurement in the 

procurement of grocery 

71 Supplemental APP and 

PPMP have been 

prepared as basis for 

procurements. 

 

Disbursements for the 

procurement of 

grocery items for the 

Groceria de la 

Universidad were 

supported with basic 

documentary 

requirements. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Implemented 

 

Post-audit showed 

that procurements of 

grocery items were 

in accordance with 

applicable provisions 

of RA 9184. 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

96 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

items for the Groceria de 

la Universidad, and 

 

25. Direct the Procurement 
Unit/OIC-Accountant to 

ensure that disbursements 

are supported with basic 

documentary 

requirements provided 

under Annex “H” of The 

2016 Revised IRR of RA 

9184 and Section 9.2 of 

COA Circular No. 2012-

001 before effecting 

payment. 

 

 

 

Implemented 

 

Disbursements in the 

procurement of 

items for the 

Groceria de la 

Universidad were 

completely and 

properly supported 

with required 

documents. 

Seven GAD activities were 

not implemented out of the 24 

GAD activities in the 

University’s GAD Plan, 

utilizing only ₱18,194,164.54 

or 35.59 percent of the total 

GAD Budget of 

₱51,117,331.43 which was 

not in accordance with 

Section 9.1 of PCW-NEDA-

DBM Joint Circular No. 12-

001, thus, other identified 

gender issues were not 

addressed depriving intended 

beneficiaries. 

 

26. We recommended that 
Management direct the 

CGAD Office to exert all 

its efforts to fully 

implement its GAD Plan 

and maximize the 

utilization of its GAD 

Budget in order to 

address the identified 

gender issues for the 

benefit of the intended 

beneficiaries as required 

72 Management, in its 

best efforts, optimize 

the implementation/ 

utilization of GBP. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Implemented 

 

Related discussion 

under Observation 

No. 19 of this report. 

 

 



 

97 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

in Section 9.1 of PCW-

NEDA-DBM Joint 

Circular No. 12-001. 

 

The University failed to 

strictly enforce 17 COEs 

involving disallowances 

aggregating ₱2,146,670.35 

which was not in conformity 

with Sections 7.1.1 (b) and 

7.1.3 of The 2009 Rules and 

Regulations on the 

Settlement of Accounts 

(RRSA), thus, said 

disallowances remained 

unsettled as of year-end.  

 

27. We recommended that the 
SUC President strictly 

enforce the COEs 

pursuant to Sections 7.1.1 

(b) and 7.1.3 of The 2009 

RRSA, otherwise, 

unsettled COEs shall be 

referred to the General 

Counsel for appropriate 

action as prescribed in 

Section 23.4 of The 2009 

RRSA. 

 

28. Moreover, if the persons 
liable are not financially 

capable to settle 

disallowances within the 

prescribed period, require 

concerned liable persons 

to submit requests for 

payment by installments 

to the Audit Team which 

shall be referred to the 

higher authorities of 

COA. 

 

74 Management is 

continuously exerting 

its efforts to collect 

settlements from those 

who are primarily 

liable 

(payee/recipients). 

 

The VPFAd, Legal 

Officer and Director 

for Financial Services 

had a dialogue with 

one of the legal heirs of 

the deceased to 

determine how the 

disallowance would be 

settled. 

 

Liable persons 

incapable of paying 

their disallowance in 

full have been 

advised/encourage to 

request for authority to 

pay by installments to 

COA though the Audit 

Team. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Not Implemented 

 

Only few COEs were 

strictly enforced.  

 

Unsettled 

disallowances with 

COEs amounted to 

₱2,151,200.35 as of 

year-end. 

 

 

 

Not Implemented 

 

Only one employee 

has requested 

authority to pay by 

installments which 

was approved by 

COA. 

 



 

98 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

AAR 2018    

Copies of perfected contracts 

and their supporting 

documents for the eighteen 

(18) procurements made 

through Public Bidding 

amounting to 

P165,394,980.17 were not 

submitted within five 

working days from execution 

or issuance thereof, as 

required under COA Circular 

No. 2009-001, hence, proper 

and timely review and 

evaluation of the contracts 

were not done by the Audit 

Team. 

 

29. We recommended that the 
University BAC adhere 

strictly to the provisions 

of COA Circular No. 

2009-001 by submitting 

contracts and their 

supporting documents 

within the prescribed 

period in order to 

facilitate timely review 

and evaluation of 

contracts entered into by 

it. 

48 The reported specific 

actions taken were not 

related to address the 

recommendation.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Not Implemented 

 

Submission of 

contracts and its 

supporting 

documents were 

delayed. 

 

 

Prior Years’ Accounts 

Receivable (ARs) in the 

amount of ₱1,113,800.00 

representing soft loans 

granted to students under the 

Student Financial Assistance 

Program (STUFAP)-Student 

Assistance Fund for 

Education 4 Strong Republic 

(SAFE 4SR) remained 

uncollected as of year-end, 

depriving qualified 

50 No specific actions 

were reported to 

intensify collection 

efforts. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

99 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

beneficiaries to avail of the 

funds intended for the 

purpose. 

 

30. We recommended that 
Management instruct the 

Director for Scholarship 

Program and the 

University Registrar to 

coordinate with each 

other together with the 

University Accountant to 

monitor the settlement of 

uncollected student loans.  

 

31. It is, further, 
recommended that 

Management send 

demand letters to all 

debtors to pay and settle 

their unpaid balances as 

specified in the contract, 

which are long overdue. 

 

 

 

 

Not Implemented 

 

Due to the pandemic 

situation, close 

monitoring of 

settlement of 

uncollected student 

loans was not 

continuously made. 

 

 

Not Implemented 

 

The change of 

administration and 

with the pandemic 

situation resulted in 

lack of collection 

efforts. 

Copies of perfected contracts 

and their supporting 

documents for the eighteen 

(18) procurements made 

through Public Bidding 

amounting to 

P165,394,980.17 were not 

submitted within five 

working days from execution 

or issuance thereof, as 

required under COA Circular 

No. 2009-001, hence, proper 

and timely review and 

evaluation of the contracts 

were not done by the Audit 

Team. 

 

32. We recommended that the 
University BAC adhere 

strictly to the provisions 

52   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Not Implemented 

 



 

100 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

of COA Circular No. 

2009-001 by submitting 

contracts and their 

supporting documents 

within the prescribed 

period in order to 

facilitate timely review 

and evaluation of 

contracts entered into by 

it. 

Submission of 

contracts and their 

supporting 

documents were 

delayed.  

Only contracts 

executed from 

procurement 

conducted through 

public bidding were 

submitted for 

auditorial review. 

AAR 2017    

A. The procurement of motor 
vehicles (buses) with a 

total cost of ₱8,175,000.00 

was tailored- fit in 

violation of Section 18 of 

the revised IRR of R.A. 

No. 9184, thus defeating 

the purpose of competitive 

bidding, and that the 

delivered buses were not 

brand new to the 

disadvantage of the 

University. 

 

B. The delivered buses were 
not brand new, as per the 

COA Inspection Report of 

Equipment and facilities 

(IREF) issued by the 

Regional Technical 

Evaluation Services 

(RTES), Regional Office 

No. 1. 

 

C. The procurement was 
marked by other violations 

as it was not covered by an 

approved Annual 

Procurement Plan (APP). 

 

51 The new 

administration and the 

BAC are now very 

prudent and strict in 

conducting 

procurement activities 

as they reasonably 

ensure that all 

procurement are well 

within the ambit of 

The 2016 Revised IRR 

of RA 9184, 

specifically on the 

requirement of an 

approved Annual 

Procurement Plan 

with the 

corresponding ABC 

and in the preparation 

of Specifications. 

 

Petition for Review on 

COA ROI decision 

denying the appeal was 

filed at the 

Commission Proper. 

 

The Legal Officer has 

initiated some legal 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

101 
 

Observation and 

Recommendation 

Reference 

(Page No.) 

Action Taken by 

Management 

Result of Auditor’s 

Validation 

D. The funding was not in 
accordance with approved 

Authority to purchase 

Motor Vehicles, instead 

the proceeds from the sale 

of Investments and Special 

Trust Funds from Special 

programs was used 

contrary to the authority 

granted by the Department 

of Budget and 

Management and Section 

4(3) of PD No. 1445. 

 

33. We have recommended 
management to ensure 

that all procurements 

should be done strictly in 

accordance with the 2016 

revised IRR of RA No. 

9184, especially on the 

requirement of an 

approved Annual 

Procurement Plan with the 

corresponding ABC and 

in the preparation of 

Specifications. 

 

34. Further, for the Board of 
regents to take appropriate 

legal action against the 

university officials 

concerned for violation of 

the procurement law and 

other related laws stated 

above in accordance with 

Section 43, Chapter 5 and 

Section 80, Chapter 7 of 

E.O. 292. 

 

actions against the 

erring supplier. 

 

The BAC and Finance 

Office are now extra 

careful in processing 

procurement 

transactions. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Implemented 

 

No similar 

deficiencies were 

noted in the post-

audit of procurement 

transactions of the 

University. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Not Implemented 

 

No final action 

against the officials 

concerned were 

undertaken. 



 

 
 

 


