EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



A)	Introduction



The Ramon Magsaysay Technological University (RMTU), a merger of three public education institutions in the Province of Zambales, was established by virtue of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 8498 enacted on February 12, 1998. The University Charter integrated the former Ramon Magsaysay Polytechnic College (RMPC) in Iba, the Western Luzon Agricultural College (WLAC) in San Marcelino, and the Candelaria School of Fisheries (CSF) in Candelaria. The strengths of its parent-institutions, which had existed since the early 1900s, served as RMTU’s springboard for its accelerated growth and development. Dr. Feliciano S. Rosete served as the first duly appointed University President and followed by Dr. Cornelio C. Garcia, becoming the first University President under its new name.



By virtue of R.A. No. 11015 signed by President Rodrigo R. Duterte on April 20, 2018, with Rep. Cheryl Deloso-Montalla as principal author, the RMTU was renamed President Ramon Magsaysay State University (PRMSU). From a technological university, it was converted into a comprehensive university. In effect, PRMSU has two charters, R.A. 8498 and R.A. 11015.



The PRMSU is strategically located in the seven municipalities of the Province of Zambales bringing closer quality education, relevant research and extension and sustainable development to the growing countryside. The University is presently headed by its President, Roy N. Villalobos.



B)	Financial Highlights



The comparative data on the financial condition and results of operations of the President Ramon Magsaysay State University for the calendar years 2020 and 2019 are presented below:





2020

2019

Increase/ (Decrease)

% Increase/ (Decrease)

A)	Financial Condition









Total Assets

₱936,212,989.22

     936,212,989.21 



₱752,957,588.57

 183,255,400.65 

24.34

Total Liabilities

₱172,201,504.42

₱145,486,672.14 

 26,714,832.28 

18.36

Net Assets/ Equity

₱764,011,484.80

₱607,470,916.43

 156,540,568.36 

25.77











B)	Results of Operations

Total Revenue and 

   Assistance Subsidy

₱516,398,144.95

₱518,088,021.21

(1,689,876.26)

(0.33%)

Total Expenses

₱ 409,024,384.98 

₱421,383,009.72

(12,358,624.74) 

(2.93%)

Surplus/Deficit for the period

₱ 107,373,759.97 

₱96,705,011.49

 10,668,748.48 

11.03%

	

C)	Scope of Audit



The audit covered the financial transactions and operations of PRMSU comprising of seven campuses including the main campus for the year ended December 31, 2020. We conducted our audit in accordance with the International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAIs).  The objectives of the audit were to (a) ascertain the level of assurance that may be placed on management’s assertions on the financial statements; (b) recommend agency improvement opportunities; and (c) determine the extent of implementation of prior year’s audit recommendations. The thrust areas identified in the audit instructions were audited on a sampling basis and the findings are incorporated in Part II of the report, as follows:



1)	Financial Audit



Audit of Financial Statements:



a)	Property, Plant and Equipment

b)	Cash and Cash Equivalents

c)	Inventory 

d)	Receivables-Disallowances/Charges

e)	Cash Advances

f)	Due to NGAs

g)	Due to GOCCs

h)	Due to LGUs

i)	Due to Other Funds



2)	Compliance Audit



a)	Compliance with tax laws and regulations;

b)	Compliance with R.A. No. 8291 (GSIS);

c)	Compliance with R.A. No. 9679 (Pag-IBIG);

d)	Due to PhilHealth;

e)	Programs and projects related to Gender and Development (GAD); and

f)	Compliance with COA and DBM Joint Circular No. 2019-1 dated January 1, 2019 (Financial Accountability Report No. 6)



3)	Other Audit Areas



a)	Status of ND, NS, NC and enforcement of COA disallowances and charges;

b.  Compliance of the curricular programs to the CHED policies, standards, and guidelines; and

c. 	Performance in licensure examinations and employability of the graduates.









D)	Independent Auditor’s Report



We rendered a qualified opinion on the fairness of presentation of the financial statements of the University for the year ended December 31, 2020 because of certain accounting errors, deficiencies and omissions that affected the reliability of the Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE accounts), such as  (a) unreconciled discrepancy of ₱128,666,060.56 between the physical inventory report and accounting records;  (b) non-maintenance of complete and updated property records by the Supply Office and the Accounting Office hindering the reconciliation thereof; and  (c) non-adjustment to the appropriate PPE accounts of the Construction Materials Inventory worth ₱23,637,938.03 issued to infrastructure projects. 



For the above noted observations, we recommended that the University President (a) instruct the Inventory Committee to (i) closely coordinate with the Accounting Division/Unit for the proper reconciliation and subsequent accounting/recording of any differences discovered during the physical count; (ii) ensure that the final inventory results are put into agreement with accounting records before the submission of the RPCPPE to the Audit Team; (b) require the Accountant and Property and Supply Management Officer to (i) prepare complete and updated Property, Plant and Equipment Ledger Cards (PPELCs) and Property Cards (PCs) to substantiate fully the balances of the reported PPE accounts; and (ii) continuously conduct periodic reconciliation of respective records to immediately detect and correct any discrepancy found, thus, preventing the accumulation thereof.



We likewise reiterated our previous audit recommendation that Management exert more effort to retrieve the pertinent documents to support the issuances of construction materials inventories worth ₱23,637,938.03 to various projects as reported in the previous years’ AARs; adjust the balances of the appropriate PPE accounts for the cost of materials consumed as determined from reliable documents; and recognize the corresponding depreciation expenses, if warranted.



E)	Summary of Other Significant Audit Observations and Recommendations



Summarized below are the other significant audit observations with their recommendations, the details of which are presented in Part II of this report. Management views and comments, including those offered during the exit conference were incorporated in the report, where appropriate.



1. 	The validity, accuracy and completeness of the Cash-Collecting Officer Account with a recorded balance of ₱1,133,958.57 as of December 31, 2020 were not ascertained due to the discrepancies between the balances of general ledger and subsidiary ledgers totaling to ₱1,136,652.46 contrary to the pertinent provisions under the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume II. Likewise, the deposits and fund transfers amounting to ₱12,794,845.10 were not recognized under the Cash in Bank-Local Currency Current Account (LCCA) due to (a) lack of information to support unidentified deposits/credit memos; and (b) late submission of bank reconciliation statements (BRS) that hindered the conduct of cut-off test for outstanding checks and transactions directly coursed through by payors/depositors to the Bank contrary to Section 3, Chapter 21 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume I. As a consequence, other affected accounts were not duly disclosed. (Observation No. 2)  



We recommended that the University President require the (a) Collecting Officers to be more diligent in issuing Official Receipts to minimize or eliminate errors in the recording of collections per Fund; (b) Accountant to (i) coordinate with the Collecting Officers to establish the difference between the Subsidiary Ledger and General Ledger balances of the Cash-Collecting Officer account as of December 31, 2020 and deposit immediately the established amount, if warranted; (ii) prepare and submit on time the monthly Bank Reconciliation Statements (BRS) for all the bank accounts maintained by the University; (iii) make follow-up on the update of the request letter issued to the Branch Manager, Land Bank -Iba, Branch for the identification of the names of the payors/depositors/Source Agency; (iv) analyze the remaining reconciling items presented above; confirm the identity of the payors/depositors/Source Agency corresponding to the unknown deposits;   and adjust the books accordingly; and (v) furnish the Audit Team a copy of journal entry vouchers (JEVs) and other proofs of compliance with these recommendations.



2. 	The accuracy, completeness and existence of the Inventory account balances totaling to ₱35,487,305.51 as at December 31, 2020 were doubtful due to (a) unreconciled variance of ₱29,834,753.16 between the Accounting records and the inventory reports of the Property & Supply Management Office (PSMO); and (b) failure of the Accounting and Property/Supply Officer to maintain complete and updated Supply Ledger Cards (SLC) and Stock Cards (SC), respectively, contrary to pertinent provisions of Chapter 8 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume I. (Observation No. 3)  



We recommended that the University President instruct (a) the Inventory Committee to (i) expedite the reconciliation process to conform the Accounting records with the actual physical count of inventories; and (b) both the Property/Supply Officer and the Accountant to (i) maintain complete and up-to-date inventory records or the Stock Cards (SCs) and Supplies Ledger Cards (SLCs), respectively, for each inventory account to support the correctness of balances of the reported inventory accounts; and (ii) continuously conduct periodic reconciliation of respective records and correct any discrepancy detected during the reconciliation so that an accurate and reliable balance of Inventory accounts could be presented in the financial statements.



3. 	The reliability of the year-end balances of the cash advances amounting to ₱598,812.42 as of December 31, 2020 was doubtful owing to various lapses in the grant and liquidation procedures such as (a) non-submission of Disbursement Vouchers (DVs) and documents supporting the grant/liquidation of cash advances; (b) noted abnormal balances per fund reflective of erroneous recording of liquidations and refunds; (c) unreconciled account balances per General Ledger (GL) controlling accounts and  Schedule of Cash Advances; (d) grant of additional cash advances despite the non-liquidation of previous cash advances; and (e) delayed liquidation of accountabilities by the accountable officers (AOs). Such practices were not in consonance with the pertinent sections of Commission on Audit (COA) Circular No. 97-002 dated February 10, 1997 and other related issuances of the Commission; thus, expenses were not recorded in the proper accounting period and accountabilities of the AOs were not duly established, exposing cash to misappropriation or misuse.  (Observation No. 5)



We recommended that the University President (a) require all accountable officers (AOs) to liquidate their cash advances as soon as the purpose/s for which these were granted have been served in accordance with pertinent laws and regulations, otherwise require the refund thereof or cause the withholding of their salaries to the extent of unsettled  advances; and (b) instruct the Accountant to (i) analyze the four cash advances accounts to determine the causes of the abnormal negative balances and the variances noted between the SLs/schedules and the General Ledger (GL) Controlling accounts, and make necessary adjustments, where appropriate; (ii) maintain SLs of accountable officers for proper monitoring of  grants and liquidations of cash advances and  ensure that no additional cash advances are granted unless the previous ones are duly liquidated or properly accounted for; and (iii) submit the Disbursement Vouchers with valid, proper and complete supporting documents.



4. 	All the 28 undergraduate curricular programs offered by the University were aligned with the mandate explicitly mentioned in Section 2 of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 11015. Of that number, only 16 were included in the listed priority courses as identified under CHED Memorandum Order (CMO) No. 05, series of 2019; 14 (campus-specific) have yet to secure Certificates of Program Compliance (COPCs) as mandated under CMO No. 14, series of 2019; while eight have yet to undergo independent accreditation as required under CMO No. 01, series of 2005; thus, the desired reforms to ensure the effectiveness of the learning environment of the students and the equitable return of the investments in education by the University were not fully attained. (Observation No. 17)



We recommended that the University President require the Vice President for Academic and Student Affairs (VP ASA) to (a) encourage students during the registration or enrollment to consider the latest priority courses to avail of the CSPs; (b) conduct an annual monitoring and assessment of the population of students for each curriculum program; and (c) align courses applied for by incoming freshmen students to priority courses as recommended by CHED to regulate enrollees in non-priority courses; and (d) comply with the requirements needed for the issuance of necessary accreditation and COPC for several curricular programs, including the BS in Hotel and Restaurant Management. 



In addition, require the Director for Quality Assurance to ascertain that (a) the lapsed accreditation statuses are updated and/or upgraded on or before the end of their grace period; and (b) ascertain that all curricular programs are subjected to independent accreditation especially when the requirements, such as the number of graduates, are already prepared. 



5. 	The University Passing Rates (UPRs) obtained by the President Ramon Magsaysay State University (PRMSU) on five out of 12 licensure examinations given during the years 2016 to 2020 were below the National Passing Rate (NPR), thus, casting doubt on the capability of the University to produce professionals from among its graduates, especially in the fields of Education, Nursing, Psychology, Forestry and Agriculture. On the other hand, based on the latest monitoring done by the different Offices of the Dean, out of 1,472 graduates in CY 2018 about 1,209 were employed, and the remaining 263 were either unemployed or with unknown status in view of unreliable tool in the gathering and consolidation of data. Nonetheless, the number of unemployed, which constitutes 17.87% of the graduates in the same batch, creates a negative impact on the realization of its mandate to produce competitive and empowered individuals.  (Observation No. 18)



We recommended that the University President require the Vice President for Academic and Student Affairs (VP ASA) to (a) take a serious study on the causes identified for the low performance in the licensure examinations, especially for degrees with in-demand jobs such as Education and Nursing; (b) adopt applicable interventions to raise the UPR  and make the University at par with other reputable learning institutions locally and in other countries to level up with the CHED standard for SUCs; (c) assign one specific office that will monitor and consolidate the report on the employability of the graduates which can be used effectively by the offices concerned for planning purposes and development of enhanced strategies; and (d) encourage all program deans to conduct in-depth studies of the employability of their respective graduates and submit the same to the Office in charge of consolidation. The study will provide valuable inputs to the CDPO on the proper matching of skills/competence with job opportunities at hand. Accordingly, the percentage of employment of graduates will increase.  



F)		Summary of Total Suspensions, Disallowances and Charges at year-end



There were no outstanding suspensions and charges as of December 31, 2020, while total disallowances amounted to ₱15,842,567.43 as at year-end.



G)		Status of Implementation of Prior Years’ Unimplemented Audit       Recommendations



Of the 131 audit recommendations contained in the prior years’ Annual Audit Reports (AARs), 89 were fully implemented, 38 were partially implemented while four were not implemented at all. Those not fully implemented were accordingly reiterated in this audit report to draw attention for their implementation.





i









