














































Executive Summary


i 

 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
 

A. Introduction 
 

The Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB) was reconstituted as 

the Human Settlements Adjudication Commission (HSAC), referred to as the 

"Commission" by virtue of Section 12, Chapter IV of the Republic Act (RA) No. 

11201, otherwise known as the “Department of Human Settlements and Urban 

Development Act” which was signed on February 14, 2019 by President Rodrigo 

Roa Duterte. The Commission assumes and continues to perform the adjudication 

function of HLURB, and is attached to the Department of Human Settlements and 

Urban Development (DHSUD) for policy, planning and program coordination only.  

 

The Commission shall be guided by the Constitutional provision that affords 

all persons the right to a speedy disposition of their cases before all judicial, quasi-

judicial or administrative bodies relating to Real Estate Development, Homeowners 

Associations and appeals from decisions of Local and Regional Planning and 

Zoning Bodies. HSAC is vested with exclusive and original jurisdiction to hear and 

decide cases involving subdivisions, condominiums, memorial parks and similar 

real estate developments and transactions, homeowners associations, the 

implementation of the balanced housing development provision of RA No. 7279 as 

amended, and laws and regulations being implemented by DHSUD; and appellate 

jurisdiction over decisions of local zoning bodies. 

 

Pursuant to Section 13, Chapter IV of the same RA, the Commission shall be 

composed of Commission en banc-Five Commissioners appointed by the President, 

and Regional Adjudication Branch (RAB). The Executive Commissioner, chosen 

by the President from among the five Commissioners, shall be responsible for the 

administration and operations of the Commission, including supervision of 

personnel, and shall be assisted by the Executive Clerk of the Commission. On the 

other hand, there shall be as many RABs as there are Regional Offices (ROs) of 

DHSUD. The President shall appoint as many Regional Adjudicators as may be 

necessary upon the recommendation of the Secretary of DHSUD. 

 

The HSAC is presently headed by Executive Commissioner Melzar P. Galicia 

and assisted by two Commissioners.   

 

The Commission has 16 RABs clustered into nine ROs, as follows:  

 

RO Coverage 

1. Expanded National Capital Region 
(ENCR) 

RAB NCR  

2. Northern Luzon Region (NLR) RAB CAR, RAB Nos. I and II 

3. Northern Tagalog Region (NTR) RAB No. III 

4. Southern Tagalog Region (STR) RAB Nos. IV-A and RAB No. IV-B 



ii 

 

RO Coverage 

5. Bicol Region (BR) RAB No. V 

6. Western Visayas Region (WVR) RAB No. VI 

7. Central Visayas Region (CVR) RAB Nos. VII and VIII 

8. Northern Mindanao Region (NMR) RAB Nos. IX, X and XIII 

9. Southern Mindanao Region (SMR) RAB Nos. XI and XII 

 

As of December 31, 2020, the Commission had a total personnel complement 

of 167, consisting of 141 filled plantilla positions and 26 Contract of Service 

personnel: 

 

Office 
Plantilla 

Position 
Contractual 

Total 

Personnel 

Central Office (CO) 83 12 95 

ENCRO 6 1 7 

NLRO 6 3 9 

NTRO 5 1 6 

STRO 10 2 12 

BRO 6 1 7 

WVRO 5 0 5 

CVRO 7 1 8 

NMRO 10 3 13 

SMRO  3 2 5 

Total 141 26 167 

 

  

B. Operational Highlights 
 

The reported agency’s targets and accomplishments for Calendar Year (CY) 

2020 are the following:  

 

Organizational Outcomes (OO) / 

Performance Indicators (PIs) 
Baseline 

Physical 

Target 

Accomplishments 

Physical  Percentage  

HUMAN SETTLEMENTS ADJUDICATION PROGRAM 

Outcome Indicators:      

1. Percentage of decisions elevated to 
Court of Appeals that are 

affirmative 

91% 91% 95% 104.39 

2. Percentage of stakeholders who 
rated adjudication process as 

satisfactory or better 

60% 66% 70% 106.06 

Output Indicators:      

1. Percentage of decisions rendered 
out of the total number of cases 

45% 43% 28% 65.11 

2. Percentage of decisions rendered 60% 60% 39% 65 



iii 

 

Organizational Outcomes (OO) / 

Performance Indicators (PIs) 
Baseline 

Physical 

Target 

Accomplishments 

Physical  Percentage  

within sixty (60) days out of the 

total number of cases ripe for 

resolution 

3. Percentage of decisions rendered 
on Home Owners Association 

(HOA) disputes within sixty (60) 

days out of the total number of 

HOA cases ripe for resolution 

60% 60% 37% 61.67 

 

 

C. Financial Highlights 
 

The financial position, financial performance and sources and utilization of 

funds of the Commission for CY 2020 are presented below:  

 

Particulars 
Amount (P) 

2020 

Financial Position 

Assets 1,544,639,164.34 

Liabilities 233,857,316.32 

Net Assets/Equity 1,310,781,848.02 

Financial Performance 

Revenue 7,161,311.62 

Current Operating Expenses 208,493,710.23 

Net Financial Assistance/Subsidy 268,744,042.42 

Miscellaneous Income 405,000.00 

Losses (426,387.68) 

Surplus/(Deficit) 67,390,256.13 

Sources and Utilization of Funds 

Appropriations 263,704,968.00 

Allotments  263,704,968.00 

Obligations Incurred 209,168,665.30 

Disbursements  208,980,127.17 

Unobligated Allotment 54,536,302.70 

 

The Summary of Appropriations, Allotments, Obligations, Disbursements and 

Balances (SAAODB) for CY 2020 is shown in Annex A.   

 

 

D. Scope of Audit 
 

The audit covered the accounts and operations of the HSAC for CY 2020. It 

was conducted to: a) ascertain the level of assurance that may be placed on the 

Management’s assertion in the financial statements; b) determine the propriety of 



iv 

 

transactions as well as extent of compliance on the applicable laws, rules and 

regulations; c) recommend agency improvement opportunities; and d) determine the 

extent of implementation of prior year’s audit recommendations. Moreover, the 

audit was conducted in accordance with International Standards of Supreme Audit 

Institutions (ISSAIs).   

 

 

E. Opinion of the auditor on the fairness of presentation of the Financial 
Statements 
 

The Auditor rendered a qualified opinion on the fairness of presentation of the 

consolidated financial statements of HSAC as of December 31, 2020, in view of the 

material deficiencies as enumerated below:  

 

 The agency’s grant of Economic and Educational Assistance (EEA) and 
payment of expenditures to Govern the Provision of Support Mechanisms 

to its officers and employees (CO and ROs) totaling P7,050,000.00 and 

P7,080,000.00, respectively, were not properly supported with complete 

documentation, contrary to Section 4(6) of Presidential Decree (PD) No. 

1445; thus, their propriety and validity could not be determined. 

 

 In HSAC-Western Visayas Region (WVRO) and Northern Mindanao 
Regional Office (NMRO), the Disbursement Vouchers (DVs) with total 

amounts of P5,765,049.77 and P2,784,845.97 for the CY 2020 and for the 

months of November and December 2020, respectively, together with the 

corresponding supporting documents and related reports were not 

submitted to the Audit Team within the prescribed period, in 

nonconformance with Section 7 of the COA Circular No. 2009-006 dated 

September 15, 2009, precluding the timely review and verification of the 

validity, propriety and legality of the transactions. 

 

 

F. Summary of Significant Observations and Recommendations 
 

The following are the significant audit observations and corresponding 

recommendations, which were discussed with Management officials concerned 

through the issuance of Audit Observation Memoranda and discussed during the 

exit conference held on June 17, 2021, details of which are further discussed in this 

report. Management views and comments were incorporated in the report, where 

appropriate. 

 

1. In HSAC-Northern Luzon Regional Office (NLRO), the issuance to end-users 
of various semi-expendable furniture and fixtures totaling P868,710.00 were 

not recognized in the books of accounts, overstating the account Semi-

Expendable Furniture and Fixtures and understating the account Semi-

Expendable Furniture, Fixture and Books Expenses. 



v 

 

We recommended and Management agreed to: 

  

a. instruct the Regional Acting Accountant to prepare adjusting entry to 
record the issuance of the semi-expendable furniture and fixtures 

consistent with the provision of the Government Accounting Manual 

(GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs) by debiting the 

Accumulated Surplus/(Deficit) account and crediting the Semi-

Expendable Furniture and Fixtures account; and 

 

b. henceforth, observe the proper accounting policies, procedures and 
preparation of documents in the issuance of semi-expendable properties. 

 

2. In HSAC-Central Office (CO), Expanded National Capital Regional Office 
(ENCRO), NLRO, Bicol Regional Office (BRO), WVRO, Central Visayas 

Region (CVRO) and Southern Mindanao Regional Office (SMRO), the 

reliability and accuracy of the carrying amount of their Property, Plant and 

Equipment (PPE) accounts totaling P1,336,899,996.19 is doubtful due to the: 

(a) failure to update/renew Property and Acknowledgement Receipts (PARs) 

and issue Property Transfer Reports (PTRs) for the transfers to DHSUD of 

PPE totaling P35,631,413.44; (b) discrepancy of P7,554,192.25 between the 

General Ledger (GL) and the Report on the Physical Count of Property, Plant 

and Equipment (RPCPPE); and (c) failure to establish the existence of the 

recorded PPE balance totaling P5,985,875.85.  

 

We recommended and Management agreed to require:  

 

HSAC-CO, NLRO and WVRO 

 

a. all the employees that were transferred to DHSUD to obtain from the 
agency clearance from fund and property accountabilities; 

 

HSAC-CO, ENCRO, NLRO and WVRO 

 

b. all the employees that were transferred to DHSUD to return their issued 
properties to the Property Officer who, in turn, must update/cancel the 

related PAR, and determine whether subject PPE would be retained by the 

agency or be transferred;  

  

HSAC-NLRO, SMRO 

 

c. the Property Custodian to prepare the list of transferred and turned-over 
properties and submit the same to the Accountant for her reference and 

appropriate action;  

 

 

 



vi 

 

HSAC-CO, ENCRO, NLRO, BRO, WVRO and SMRO 

 

d. the Property Custodian to prepare a PTR for the transfer of PPE, and 
update/issue a new PAR to HSAC employees for their issued properties;  

 

HSAC-NLRO, BRO and CVRO 

 

e. Inventory Committee to establish the existence of the recorded PPE 
through periodic conduct of physical count, as prescribed by the GAM for 

NGAs, or other means/procedures they deem proper to check the integrity 

of property custodianship, and to submit the RPCPPE to the Audit Team; 

 

f. Accountant and the Property Officer to periodically reconcile their 
records; and  

 

HSAC-ENCRO, NLRO, WVRO and SMRO 

 

g. the concerned Accountants to prepare the necessary adjusting entries for 
the transfer of properties to DHSUD.   

 

3. In HSAC-CO, the carrying amount of the Computer Software totaling 
P1,512,518.60 was overstated by P185,138.93 due to the erroneous 

computation of its amortization, inconsistent with Section 10, Chapter 12, 

Volume I of the GAM for NGAs, affecting its fair presentation in the financial 

statements.  

 

We recommended and Management agreed to require the Chief Accountant 

to: 

 

a. correct the recorded amortization of the computer software and the related 
Accumulated Amortization, as well as the Accumulated Surplus/(Deficit); 

and 

 

b. henceforth, observe the amortization of intangible assets in accordance 
with the policy provided by the GAM for NGAs.  

 

We further recommended and Management agreed to submit an explanation 

on the non-utilization of the computer software that remained idle since its 

acquisition in November 2016. 

 

4. The completeness and accuracy of the balance of trust liabilities of HSAC-
CO, ENCRO and Southern Tagalog Regional Office (STRO) aggregating 

P94,830,655.81 could not be ascertained because of (a) the nonsystematic 

recordkeeping and monitoring of the consignation fees totaling 

P33,530,568.69 for all cases received in HSAC-CO and STRO, contrary to 

Item 1, Section 111 of PD No. 1445; and (b) the inclusion of dormant trust 



vii 

 

liabilities equivalent to 41.38 percent or P32,644,813.32 of HSAC-CO and 

ENCRO’s trust liabilities of P78,896,643.34. 

 

We recommended and Management agreed to strengthen the HSAC-CO and 

ENCRO’s internal control and monitoring of the accounts through the 

following: 

 

HSAC-CO and STRO 

 

a. head of the Office of the Executive Clerk/Acting Regional Director to 
create a committee to monitor and reconcile the resolved and unresolved 

cases to update the agency’s records;  

 

b. Chief/Acting Accountant to request a copy of the records of the cases 
received and disposed/resolved from the Office of the Executive 

Clerk/Chief Administrative Officer to facilitate the reconciliation of 

balances with the recorded Trust Liabilities account;   

 

HSAC-CO 

 

c. Chief Accountant to review, analyze, and reconcile the dormant 
consignation fees;  

 

HSAC-ENCRO 

 

d. the Arbiter of the Adjudication Division to provide the Accounting 
Division with the copy of the status of cases filed; hence, the Regional 

Accountant could determine the resolved cases; 

 

e. henceforth, inform the Arbiter to prepare and issue order of release of 
consignation fees of those resolved cases; and 

 

f. the Regional Accountant to request for write-off of the dormant accounts, 
when necessary, strictly in accordance with the requirements of COA 

Circular 97-001 and prepare the necessary adjusting entries.    

 

5. In HSAC-ENCRO, the handling of its collections was characterized by 
deficiencies, such as: (a) incurrence of delays ranging from four to 298 days in 

the deposit of collections; and (b) the designated Collecting Officer (CO) in 

HSAC-ENCRO is also the designated cashier in DHSUD-ENCRO, 

inconsistent with Sections 32 and 9, Chapter II of the Revised Cash 

Examination Manual (RCEM), and a breach of the sound internal control 

system over cash. 

 

 

 



viii 

 

We recommended and Management agreed to: 

 

a. instruct the CO to deposit intact all his collections daily or not later than 
the next banking day;  

 

b. monitor strict adherence of the CO with Section 32, Chapter II of the 
RCEM;  

 

c. designate immediately a new CO for HSAC-ENCRO; and  
 

d. establish adequate internal control measures in the handling of collections. 
 

6. In HSAC-CO, Contract of Service (COS) Personnel, Janitors and Security 
Guards were also granted the same benefits totaling P816,000.00, in violation 

of Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB) Resolution No. 09-2012 

dated April 27, 2012 and COA-DBM Joint Circular (JC) No. 2, s. 2020 dated 

October 20, 2020; thus, irregular.   

 

We recommended that Management: 

 

a. require the refund of the Support Mechanisms that were granted and paid 
to the agency’s COS Personnel, Janitors and Security Guards without legal 

basis; and 

 

b. refrain from granting benefits and paying unauthorized expenditures.   
 

7. In HSAC-Northern Tagalog Regional Office (NTRO) and STRO, perfected 
Purchase Orders (POs) and Contracts that were issued during the year were 

not submitted to the Audit Team within the prescribed period in violation of 

Sections 3.1.1 and 3.2.1 of the COA Circular No. 2009-001 dated February 

12, 2009, preventing the auditorial review that would detect deficiencies early, 

and the immediate communication to Management of the results of audit for 

appropriate remedial action.  

 

We recommended and HSAC-NTRO and STRO Management agreed to direct 

the concerned employees to monitor the submission of all perfected POs and 

Contracts to the Audit Team within the prescribed period.   

 

We further recommended and HSAC-NTRO Management agreed to make 

representations with the appropriate authorities for the augmentation of 

personnel necessary in the operations of the agency.  

 

8. The Regional Accountant, the Disbursing Officer and the CO of the DHSUD-
STRO who were temporarily assigned in the handling and disposing of 

HSAC-STRO funds lack authority or proper assignment order to discharge 

such functions, in violation of the Sections 2 and 4.4 of PD No. 1445. 



ix 

 

We recommended and the Officer-In-Charge (OIC) Regional Director agreed 

to secure from DHSUD-CO or DHSUD-STRO Regional Director a special 

order for the Accountant, the Disbursing Officer and the CO authorizing them 

to perform the duties and functions of their position in HSAC-STRO, until 

such time that the plantilla positions has been filled up. 

 

9. In HSAC-STRO and NMRO, Bank Reconciliation Statements (BRSs) were 
submitted late with delays ranging from 60 to 183 days, and the BRSs for the 

months of November and December were still unsubmitted, contrary to 

Section 7, Chapter 21, Volume I of the GAM for NGAs, preventing the 

identification on time of any reconciling items requiring adjustments.  

 

We recommended and Management agreed to:  

 

HSAC-STRO and NMRO 

 

a. Require the Acting/Regional Accountant to prepare and submit to the 
Audit Team copy of the BRS within the prescribed period together with 

the supporting documents;  

 

b. Henceforth, prepare the adjusting entries for any reconciling items 
requiring adjustments;  

 

HSAC-STRO 

 

c. Advise the Acting Accountant to make representation with the bank 
officials to secure access to online banking account for the real time bank 

statement and balances;  

 

d. Require the Acting Regional Director to immediately hire accounting 
personnel; and  

 

HSAC-NMRO 

 

e. Advise the Accountant to coordinate with cashier in the follow up of the 
bank statements from the agency’s depository bank.  

 

10. In HSAC-BRO, various unserviceable PPE items with total cost of 
P696,935.60 were still reported in the RPCPPE, contrary to Section 40(d), 

Chapter 10, Volume I of the GAM for NGAs, and were not disposed of as of 

December 31, 2020 due to the pending transfer/distribution of properties to 

respective regional offices of DHSUD and HSAC, which is not in accordance 

with Section 79 of PD No. 1445, depriving the government of income that 

may have been derived from the sale thereof.  

 

 



x 

 

We recommended and Management agreed to instruct the:  

 

a. Property Officer to account the unserviceable PPE items and prepare the 
Inventory and Inspection Report of Unserviceable Property (IIRUP);  

 

b. Disposal Committee to immediately undertake the disposal of said PPE in 
accordance with Section 40(d), Chapter 10, Volume I of the GAM for 

NGAs and Section 79 of PD No. 1445 to maximize their realizable value 

and to clear the storage space they occupy; and  

 

c. henceforth, furnish the Accountant with a copy of the IIRUP as basis for 
dropping from the books the cost of disposed PPE. 

 

11. In HSAC-WVRO, the agency’s practices in the accrual and use of 
Compensatory Overtime Credits (COCs) are not in accordance with the 

provisions of Civil Service Commission-Department of Budget and 

Management (CSC-DBM) JC No. 2, s. 2004 dated October 4, 2004, thereby 

casting doubts on the accuracy and reliability of the leave credit balances of 

its personnel.  

 

We recommended and Management agreed to require the: 

 

a. Acting Personnel Officer to: 
 

i. backtrack and review postings and computation of the leave balances 
in the leave cards and ensure that COCs are not used to offset 

undertimes/tardiness of employees, and that absences charged to 

COCs are duly supported with Certificates of COCs Earned and 

Leave Forms; 

 

ii. ensure that unutilized COCs are forfeited upon expiration of their 
validity; 

 

iii. maintain and submit a monthly report on summary of overtime 
services rendered and the equivalent COCs to the Head of Office; 

 

iv. regularly review the Daily Time Records (DTRs), Applications for 
Leave and supporting documents, and the postings made to the leave 

cards; 

 

b. Head of Office to: 
 

i. appropriately authorize employees to render overtime services by 
issuing office orders specifying the date and time for rendition and 

its purpose; 

 



xi 

 

ii. grant Certificates of COCs Earned, concurrently setting safeguarding 
measures to prevent any form of fraud and/or duplicity; 

 

iii. approve/disapprove applications for Compensatory Time Off (CTO) 
(Leave Forms) based on duly approved and unexpired Certificates of 

COCs Earned, without compromising the delivery of services to 

clientele; and 

 

iv. ensure proper implementation of all the guidelines set forth in CSC-
DBM JC No. 2, s. 2004 dated October 4, 2004. 

 

12. In HSAC-WVRO, entries in the DTRs for the months of April to October 
2020 were recorded manually, despite the availability of time sheet reports for 

timekeeping generated by the biometric machine, contrary to CSC 

Memorandum Circular (MC) No. 21, s. 1991 dated June 4, 1991, inviting 

suspicion on the authenticity of the manually entered attendance information. 

 

We recommended and Management agreed to direct the:  

 

a. agency employees to register their daily attendance in the biometric 
machine and logbook; 

 

b. Acting Personnel Officer to: 
 

i. utilize and submit DTRs generated by the biometric machine 
together with complete supporting documents; and 

 

ii. regularly verify and review the attendance entries made in the 
logbook. 

 

13. In HSAC-SMRO, various deficiencies were observed in the transactions 
involving the P15,000.00 Petty Cash Fund (PCF), such as: (a) the amount that 

was setup was way beyond the recurring expenses for one month; and (b) 

utilizations were not in accordance with the purposes for which the PCF was 

granted, contrary to the various provisions of the GAM for NGAs on the 

accounting policies on PCF, raising doubts on the necessity of having a PCF.  

  

We recommended and Management agreed to instruct the Administrative 

Officer to: 

  

a. review the monthly recurring petty operating expenses of its office to be 
able to setup a realistic PCF sufficient for one month; and  

 

b. ensure that the PCF is utilized and liquidated in accordance with the PCF 
guidelines.  

 



xii 

 

14. The HSAC failed to resolve 71 out of 180 Appealed cases within the 90-day 
period incurring a delay ranging from four to 230 days, contrary to Section 99 

of the 2019 HLURB Rules and Procedures.   

 

We recommended and the Executive Commissioner agreed to: 

 

a. enforce compliance of the Board of Commissioners with the guidelines set 
forth under Section 99 of the 2019 HLURB Rules and Procedures in the 

next and coming years to improve agency’s compliance of its mandate; 

and 

 

b. closely monitor and instruct other capable personnel in the Administrative 
Office to assist the Human Resource Section (HRS) to expedite the filling 

up of vacant positions to complement the existing workforce to achieve 

the agency’s expected output. 

 

 

G. Implementation of Prior Year’s Audit Recommendations 
 

Of the 36 audit recommendations contained in the CYs 2018 and 2019 Annual 

Audit Report (AAR) on HLURB, 18 were implemented and 18 were not 

implemented.  


