AUDIT OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS



Deficiencies in the Recording and Monitoring of PPE Accounts



1)	The existence, accuracy and reliability of the Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) accounts of the University totaling P348.900 million as of year-end could not be established due to deficiencies in the recording and monitoring of said accounts, contrary to the pertinent provisions of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs).



Pertinent provisions of Chapter 10, Volume I of GAM for NGAs provide that:

“Sec. 4. Applying the Capitalization Threshold of P15,000. The capitalization threshold of P15,000 represents the minimum cost of an individual asset recognized as a PPE on the Statement of Financial Position.

  xxx

Sec. 27. Depreciation. xxx.

c. Depreciation of an asset begins when it is available for use such as when it is in the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management. For simplicity and to avoid proportionate computation, depreciation shall be for one month if the PPE is available for use on or before the 15th of the month. However, if the PPE is available for use after the 15th of the month, depreciation shall be for the succeeding month. xxx.

l. xxx. Depreciation expense shall be recognized on a monthly basis subject to item (c) of this Section. xxx.



Sec. 38. Physical Count of PPE. The entity shall have a periodic physical count of PPE, which shall be done annually and presented on the Report on the Physical Count of Property, Plant and Equipment (RPCPPE) (Appendix 71) as at December 31 of each year. This shall be submitted to the Auditor concerned not later than January 31 of the following year. Equipment found at station and losses discovered during the physical count shall be reported to the Accounting Division/Unit for proper accounting/recording.”

Verification of the balances of Property, Plant and Equipment accounts as of December 31, 2020 of the University disclosed the following deficiencies:

1)		Incomplete conduct of the physical count of Property, Plant and Equipment PPE) totaling P348.900 million, as shown in Table 1.

	----media/image1.emf----

	

	The Inventory Committee of the University conducted the physical count of PPE at year- end, however, only the 2020 acquisitions were inspected.  According to them, the reason for this was to minimize the time of physical contact in view of the pandemic. Consequently, the existence, completeness and condition of PPEs acquired by the University amounting to P348.900 million could not be established. 

	

2)		Semi-expendable Books, which are below the capitalization threshold of P15,000.00, were reflected in the financial statements under the PPE account with a total carrying amount of P1.970 million as of year-end, as shown below.

	----media/image2.emf----

	

	

	

	

Interview with the present Accountant of Pontevedra Campus revealed that the former Accountant, who resigned from service in May 2020, recorded the books procured based on the total acquisition cost instead of the individual cost of the asset. She acknowledged the deficiency but was not able to make the necessary adjustments at year-end. Consequently, the balance of the PPE account as of December 31, 2020 is overstated.

	

3)		----media/image3.emf----The balance of Accumulated Depreciation in the books of Burias Campus and Sigma Satellite College as of year-end was overstated and understated by P53,910.32 and P27,194.53, respectively, as shown in the following table. (Details in Appendix F)

	It was observed that for Burias Campus, a number of fully depreciated PPE were still provided with depreciation for the current year. As for Sigma Satellite College, the Accountant erroneously provided an understated annual depreciation for some PPE items. The Accountants said that they overlooked some of the amounts used in the preparation of the schedule of depreciation which was the basis for the recognition thereof in the books of account. Hence, the Accumulated Depreciation and Depreciation Expense accounts reflected in the financial statements were overstated and understated, respectively, by P26,715.79.

	

4)		Depreciation expenses were not recognized on a monthly basis contrary to the Government Accounting Manual (GAM).

	----media/image4.emf----

	



















As shown in Table 3 above, the Central Administration and all Campuses or Satellite Colleges did not recognize the depreciation on a monthly basis. The Accountants recognized the depreciation either on a quarterly or annual basis which resulted to inaccurate monthly reports such as the trial balances and the financial statements.  Consequently, the results of operation of the University in a given period of time could not be relied upon. Some of the Accountants admitted that since the financial statements are prepared quarterly, they decided to recognize the depreciation also on a quarterly basis. While the Accountant of Roxas Main commented that recognizing depreciation either on a monthly or yearly basis would result to the same amount of depreciation at year-end hence, she instead opted to recognize the depreciation of the PPE annually to lessen her workload.



As a result of the foregoing deficiencies, the existence, accuracy and reliability of the PPE accounts totaling P348.900 million as of December 31, 2020 could not be established.



We recommended and the Management agreed to:



a)	 Direct the Inventory Committee to properly plan the conduct of the physical count of PPE and include the inspection and counting of all the PPEs owned by the University. Submit a work plan and corresponding timelines to the Auditor for monitoring purposes;



b)	 Direct the Accountants of Pontevedra and Burias Campuses, and Sigma Satellite College to make the necessary adjustments to exclude semi-expendable books which are below the capitalization threshold of P15,000.00 from the PPE account; and



c)	 Ensure compliance by the Accountants of the University with the pertinent provisions in the GAM for NGAs with regard to the recording of PPEs and recognition of depreciation expenses on a monthly basis.



Long Outstanding Receivables



2)	Allowance for Impairment of Accounts Receivables totaling P69.239 million which remained uncollected were not recognized/recorded, thus, affecting the fair presentation of said accounts in the financial statements.  



Section 10 of Chapter 7 of Government Accounting Manual (GAM), Volume 1 provides that:

	“xxx

	In case of Account Receivable, the Allowance for Impairment shall be provided in an amount based on collectability of receivable balances and evaluation of such factors as aging of accounts, collection experiences of the agency, expected loss experiences and identified doubtful accounts.” 

Pertinent provisions of COA Circular No. 2016-005 dated December 19, 2016, which laid down the guidelines and procedures on the Write-off of Dormant Receivable Accounts, state that:

“Section 6.1 All government entities shall conduct regular monitoring and analysis of receivable accounts to ensure that these are collected when these become due and demandable xxx



The Accountant shall:



7.1 Conduct regular and periodic verification, analysis, and validation of the existence of the receivables, unliquidated cash advances, and fund transfers, and determine the concerned debtors, accountable officers (Regular and Special Disbursing Officers, Collecting Officers, Cashiers) and the source and implementing government entities concerned.”



----media/image5.emf----The following are the details of account balances for Account Receivables as of year-end, to wit: 

Verification of the accounts revealed that the non-current Accounts Receivables amounting to P69.239 million were not provided with Allowance for Impairment even though collectability of these accounts are uncertain and have been long overdue as shown in the Schedule of Aging of Accounts Receivables (Appendix G),  thus affecting the fair presentation of balances reflected in the financial statements.

As disclosed in the Notes to the Financial Statements of the University, the amount of prior years’ balance of the Accounts Receivable totaling P69.239 million or 36.84 percent of the total receivables were collectibles from students for their tuition fees and other school fees from previous years that were not covered by Republic Act No. 10931 also known as the "Universal Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act". As per Schedule of the Aging of Receivables, P5.048 million or 2.69 percent were aged over 1 year to 2 years; P5.331 million or 2.84 percent were aged over 2 years to 3 years; and P58.859 million or 31.31 percent were aged over 3 years. 



Moreover, the Accountants disclosed that most of the prior years’ balances were collectibles from students who already graduated and were no longer connected to the University. According to the concerned personnel, no directive was given by the Management to send demand letters to student-debtors hence, they did not do so.  Instead, the management, instructed the concerned personnel to withheld the students’ school credentials and required the settlement of their accounts prior to the release thereof as a means of collecting the receivables. But despite of that, the collection efficiency of these receivables were minimal ranging from 1.09 to 30.32 percent and 0.50 to 19.86 percent for CY 2019 and 2020, respectively, as shown in the Table 5. 



----media/image6.emf----



Although these receivables have long been outstanding and the collectability uncertain due to low collection efficiency rate, no Allowance for Impairment had been provided by the Management despite our previous year’s’ audit recommendations. According to the Chief Accountant, a uniform basis for providing the Allowance for Impairment will be established first prior to its implementation. 



Meanwhile, COA Circular No. 2016-005 prescribes the guidelines and procedures in reconciling and cleaning the books of accounts of NGAs, LGUs, and GOCCs of dormant receivable accounts, unliquidated cash advances, and fund transfers for fair presentation of accounts in the FSs. Pursuant to the said Circular, a request for write-off of account receivables, which have long been outstanding and remained past due, is warranted. The Accountants commented that the request for write off will be considered when all means of collecting the receivables have been exhausted provided it will qualify with the guidelines in the aforementioned Circular.



Non-recognition of Allowance for Impairment of Accounts Receivable affected the fair presentation of such account in the financial statement as of year-end.



We recommended and the Management agreed to:



a)	Require the Accountants to provide Allowance for Impairment for Accounts Receivable for its fair presentation in the financial statements; 



b)	Direct the Accountant to send demand letters to student-debtors in order to increase collection efficiency of accounts receivables; and 



c)	Direct the Accountants of the various Campuses to regularly monitor, analyze and validate the existence of the receivables and when appropriate, request for write off of pertinent receivables following the guidelines set forth in COA Circular No. 2016-005.



Unreconciled Cash-in-Bank LCCA



3)	Reconciling items of Cash-in-Bank Local Currency, Current Account (LCCA) totaling 164.009 million remained unadjusted in the books as of year-end contrary to Section 3.1.19 of COA Circular No. 92-125A dated March 4, 1992, and Section 6, Chapter 21 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume I, resulting to inaccurate balances of the Cash-in-Bank LCCA and other consequently affected accounts.



Section 3.1.19 of COA Circular No. 92-125A states that:



“The preparation and reconciliation procedures on bank/treasury reconciliation provides that, the Accountant is required to prepare the necessary adjusting/correcting entries after the TRS/BRS are made and the items for adjustments are properly analyzed and verified and record them in the proper journals.” 



   Likewise, Section 6, Chapter 21 of GAM Volume I provides that:



“Recognition of Adjustments. The Chief Accountant/Designated Staff shall prepare a JEV to recognize all reconciling items that require adjustment and correction in the books of accounts.” 

	

Bank Reconciliation is the settlement of differences contained in the bank statement and the cash account in the agency’s/entity’s books of accounts.



The Bank Reconciliation Statement (BRS) is prepared in order to:   



a)	Check correctness of both the bank’s and agency’s/entity’s records;

b)	Serve as a deterrent to fraud; and

c)	Enable the agency/entity or bank to take up charges or credits recognized.

 

----media/image7.emf----



Verification of BRS of various accounts of Capiz State University (CapSU) revealed that Local Currency Current Accounts (LCCA) with the Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP) and Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) of Central Administration, and Dumarao Satellite Colleges as of December 31, 2020 have various reconciling items in the books which resulted in an understatement of ₱164.009 million as of year-end as shown in the table below. Details as to the nature, date of incurrence and amount are shown in Appendix H attached. 



Table 6 shows that the Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP) Trust Fund (TF) account of Central Administration has the highest reconciling amount of ₱163.916 million as of year-end which is 99.94 percent of the total unreconciled items. Verification disclosed that these were deposits downloaded from the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) for UniFAST’s Free Higher Education and Tertiary Education Subsidy for the month of December 2020 which remained unrecorded in the books of the University. 



Reconciling items of other accounts were mostly transactions such as: a) unrecorded deposits like Advice to Debit Account (ADA) issued and credit memo (CM); and b) erroneous deposit, where some of these transactions were incurred prior to CY 2019.



The Accountant disclosed that inquiries have been made with the bank whenever there is/are any credit memos, however, the bank can only provide the source but not the nature and purpose resulting to the delay of issuance of official receipts.  



Reconciling items stated above which remained unadjusted and unverified in the books of accounts have rendered the balances of the Cash-in-Bank LCCA and other affected accounts inaccurate.



This is a reiteration of our prior years’ audit recommendation (AAR CY 2017) which was partially implemented because the bank could not identify all accounts deposited as to its source, nature and purpose especially those of previous years.



We recommended and the Management agreed to:



a)	Require the Accountant to closely monitor the Cash-in-Bank accounts by securing copies of bank statements or snapshots as of month/year end to ensure that deposits downloaded by other agencies or any credit memos appearing in the bank statements are taken up and recorded in the books immediately;



b)	Make a written query to the bank as to the source, nature and purpose of unsupported deposits and credit memos reflected in the Bank Statements; and



c)	Verify and analyze the reconciling items and effect the necessary adjustments in the books.













Land Accounts Not Supported with Records



4)	Land account totaling P59.835 million as of year-end is unreliable due to non-maintenance of Property Plant and Equipment Ledger Card (PPELC) and subsidiary records contrary to Sections 111(1) and 114(2) of Presidential Decree (P.D.) No. 1445 thus, the validity and accuracy of the said account in the financial statement could not be ascertained. Likewise, ownership to some of these lands were not secured by Original/Transfer Certificate of Title (OCT/TCT) in the name of the agency, thus, construction of buildings and improvements on lots not lawfully owned by the University could put the University’s interests in jeopardy. 

	

Pertinent Sections of PD No. 1445 provide that:

			Section 111(1). “The accounts of an agency shall be kept in such detail as is necessary to meet the needs of the agency and at the same time be adequate to furnish the information needed by fiscal or control agencies of the government.”  

		

		Section 114(2). “Subsidiary records shall be kept where necessary. xxx”

	

	Also, Section 5, Chapter 10 of Government Accounting Manual (GAM) states that “PPE that qualifies for recognition as an asset shall be measured at cost.  However, where the PPE is acquired through a non-exchange transaction, its cost shall be measured at its fair value as at the date of acquisition.”

----media/image8.emf----

The University has a ledger balance of Land totaling P61.423 million (as shown in Table 7) as of year-end.  

Likewise, Table 8 on the next page presents the details and status of the land occupied by the University.

	----media/image9.emf----



Upon verification of the reports and documents presented, we noted the following:



1. The Accounting Unit did not maintain the PPELC for Land account totaling P59.835 million or 97.41 percent of the total amount of P61.423 million (shown in Table 8). The Accountant informed the Audit Team that there were no records turned over to her by the previous Accountant to support the recorded balance presented in the Financial Statement.  To address the deficiency, she is now working on identifying the costs of individual lots that are covered with title and make the necessary adjustments in the books.

		

The absence of records and details such as the location, lot numbers, land titles, area, and corresponding acquisition cost or fair value resulted in difficulty of validating the balance of said account, thus, the accuracy and reliability of the amount presented in the books could not be ascertained.

	

2. As presented in Table 8, the University occupied 112 parcels of land with total aggregate area of 411.53 hectares located in 10 campuses/satellite colleges. Of the total number of lots, only 35 lots with an area of 153.53 hectares or 37.28 percent of the total area were covered with Transfer Certificate of Title (TCT) in the name either of Capiz Agricultural and Fishery School (now CapSU Pontevedra Campus), Capiz Institute of Technology (now CapSU Roxas Main Campus) and Panay State Polytechnic College (former name of CapSU).  Status of the remaining 77 lots are the following: 21 lots with an area of  113.19 hectares or 27.50 percent of the total area, were supported only with Tax Declarations; 50 lots with an area of  106.67 hectares or 25.92 percent,  were still in the name of the original owners whether with Original/Transfer Certificate of Title (OCT/TCT) or Tax Declarations while the remaining six lots with an area of 38.23 hectares or 9.29 percent, have no documents (OCT/TCT or Tax Declarations) to support the Deed of Sale or Deed of Donation executed in favor of the school. 

	

    Interview with the Director of Landholdings and Physical Resources disclosed that in CY 2020 he was able to secure the documents of three untitled lots in Pontevedra Campus   for processing with the Registry of Deeds.  Two lots and five lots in Pilar Satellite College and Burias Campus, respectively, are subject for resurvey. Two lots in Dumarao Satellite College are now on process with the Bureau of Internal Revenue for issuance of Certificate Authorizing Registration.  However, 11 out of 77 lots, are with adverse claims or pending case in court. According to the concerned Director, he has encountered some difficulties in processing of documents because of the pandemic.   



Consequently, construction of buildings, structures or any improvements on said acquired lots, which are not lawfully owned by the University, could put the University’s interests in jeopardy



This is a reiteration of the prior year’s (CY 2018) audit recommendations which was partially implemented.   



We recommended and the Management agreed to: 



a)	Direct the Accountants to:



a.1. Exert efforts in identifying the details of the P59.835 million recorded balance of land account in the books and prepare a PPELC for every parcel of lot being identified; 



a.2. Ensure that those parcels of land covered with title in the name of the school are properly accounted in the books of accounts;



b)	Require the  Director of Landholdings and Physical Resources to:



b.1. Hire the services of a Geodetic Engineer for the conduct of relocation survey of the land area occupied by the University to determine actual boundaries and location of the properties; and 



b.2. Facilitate the documents necessary for the issuance of Certificate of Title for those parcels of land without any adverse claim or pending case in court.















Long Outstanding StuFAP and SAFE Loan Receivables



5)	Outstanding Receivables from students-borrowers of Student Financial Assistance Program (StuFAP) and Student Assistance Fund for Education (SAFE) totaling P1.077 million were not monitored and promptly collected contrary to Section 6.1 of COA Circular No. 2016-005, thus, the probability of collecting the same could not be ascertained. Moreover, Other Receivables in the amount of P215,439.11 remained unaccounted for and not supported with details and ledgers contrary to Sections 111 and 114 of Presidential Decree (P.D) No. 1445, thus, rendered the balance reflected in the financial statements as of year-end unreliable.



Section 6.1 of COA Circular No. 2016-005 dated December 19, 2016 provides that “All government entities shall conduct regular monitoring and analysis of receivable accounts to ensure that these are collected when these become due and demandable x x x.”



Pertinent sections of P.D. 1445 provide that “(Sec.111) The accounts of an agency shall be kept in such detail as is necessary to meet the needs of the agency and at the same time be adequate to furnish the information needed by fiscal or control agencies of the government. (Sec.114) Subsidiary records shall be kept where necessary.”



In Volume II of Government Accounting Manual (GAM), it provides that Subsidiary Ledger form shall be used to show the details for each control account in the General Ledger (GL) which is maintained per account and fund cluster by the Accounting Division/Unit.



Further, COA Circular No. 2016-005 laid down the guidelines and procedures on the Write-off of Dormant Receivable Accounts, among others, of National Government Agencies (NGAs), Local Government Units (LGUs) and Government-Owned and Controlled Corporations (GOCCs). Dormant Receivable Accounts, as defined in the circular, refers to accounts which balances remained inactive or non-moving in the books of accounts for 10 years or more and where settlement or collectability could no longer be ascertained.



----media/image10.emf----Breakdown of Other and Loans Receivables from students-grantees as of year-end are shown in the following tables, to wit:



















----media/image11.emf----









----media/image12.emf----



The University had granted StuFAP Loans to students of P4,000.00 and P8,000.00 payable in five and 10 years, respectively.

Verification of the accounts revealed the following:

1)	StuFAP Loan has an outstanding balance as of December 31, 2020 of P479,200.00. As presented in Table 9, Pontevedra and Roxas Main Campuses have poor collection efficiency of 5.08 percent and 8.53 percent, respectively, and receivables remained non-moving during the current year.  These loans have already matured ranging from year 2009 to 2018 depending on the mode of payment.  Table 11 summarizes the details on the availment of the said program. 



On the other hand, SAFE loan has an outstanding balance of P0.598 million (Table 9) and a collection efficiency of 31.96 percent. This loan was availed by Pontevedra Campus students and likewise has already matured.  Four students from Batch 1 and Batch 2 were not able to graduate from their courses (Appendix I-5).



The Accountant of Burias Campus was able to send demand letters to student-grantees and their guarantors but only a few responded and settled their accounts. On the other hand, the Accountants of the other Campuses and Satellite Colleges were not able to make demands by sending letters to the student-grantees and/or guarantors. Instead, the Accountants required the guarantors, who are still employed with the University, to make partial payments and full payment for those who will retire.



Consequently, the probability of collecting these loan balances could not be ascertained due to poor collection efficiency. 



2)	The outstanding StuFAP Loan balance of Burias Campus amounting to P84,500.00 (Table 9) was erroneously transferred by the Accountant to the Trust Liabilities account during the current year when it should have remained as a receivable due to its nature. As a result, the affected accounts are either understated or overstated.



3)	Other Receivables of Pontevedra Campus totaling P215,439.11 remained unaccounted and dormant since CY 2010 and not supported with ledgers, rendering the balance reflected in the financial statements as of year-end unreliable. According to the present Accountant, the debtors of these amounts could not be identified due to absence of the relevant documents to support the same. She further stated that the documents could no longer be located despite her efforts. Thus, where settlement or collectability of these unaccounted receivables could no longer be ascertained, a request for write-off pursuant to the guidelines and procedures set forth in COA Circular No. 2016-005 is warranted.



We recommended and the Management agreed to:



a)	Direct the Accountants to send demand letters to the concerned student-grantees and their guarantors on collecting StuFAP and SAFE loans; 



b)	Direct the Accountant of Burias Campus to make the necessary adjustments to record the outstanding StuFAP Loans under the receivable account; and 



c)	Direct the Accountant of Pontevedra Campus to validate the existence of the unaccounted receivables and when appropriate, request for write off of pertinent receivables following the guidelines set forth in COA Circular No. 2016-005.



Deficiencies in the Recording and Monitoring of Inventories 



6)	Deficiencies were noted in the recording, monitoring and physical count of inventories of Roxas Main Campus totaling P0.650 million as of year-end contrary to pertinent provisions of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), thus, the accuracy and existence of inventory balances in the financial statements as of December 31, 2020 cannot be established.



Pertinent Sections of GAM for NGAs Volumes I state the following:



	Section 13, Paragraph 3, Chapter 8 states that “Physical count/inventory, which is required semi-annually, is an indispensable procedure for checking the integrity of property custodianship.”

	Section 17 prescribes the records, forms and reports to be prepared and/or maintained which include among others:

	 “c. Supplies Ledger Card (SLC) (Appendix 57) – shall be used to record materials received, issued and the balance both in quantity and amount at any time. It shall be maintained by the Accounting Division/Unit for each kind of supplies and materials. x x x

	

	  i. Report on the Physical Count of Inventories (RPCI) (Appendix 66) – shall be used to report the physical count of supplies by type of inventory as at a given date.  It shows the balance of inventory items per card and per count and shortage/overage, if any. These include the semi-expendable property wherein the issue is covered by ICS.”



In addition, Appendix 66, Volume II of the same Manual provides that the RPCI shall be reconciled with the SLCs and SCs maintained by the Accounting Division/Unit, and Property and/or Supply Division/Unit, respectively. Also, the report shall be submitted to the COA Auditor concerned not later than July 31 and January 31 of each year for the first and second semesters, respectively.



----media/image13.emf----The balances of Inventory accounts as of December 31, 2020 of Roxas Main Campus are presented below:











Verification of the accounts disclosed the following deficiencies:

1)		Overstatement of Inventory Accounts 

	

	Textbooks held for sale amounting to P356,168.26 already sold to students/buyers were erroneously included in the balance of the Textbooks and Instructional Materials Inventory account hence, the balance of the inventory account as of year-end is overstated.

	

	Interview with the Accountant revealed that the balance of P356,168.26 reflected in the Textbooks and Instructional Materials Inventory corresponds to the books held for sale by the Campus which were already sold on account to buyers as of year-end hence, these items should no longer be included as part of the inventory of the Campus. The Accountant admitted that she erred in including it as part of the inventory instead of recognizing it in the proper receivable account.



2)		Deficiencies in the preparation of the Supplies Ledger Card (SLC) 

	

	The Supplies Ledger Card maintained by the Accountant did not indicate the quantity and unit cost under the balance column of the SLC after every transactions. The Accountant said that she inadvertently included the balance Accountable Forms (A.F.No. 51) already issued to the end-user (the Collecting Officer) thus, the SLC maintained by the Accountant was  not reconciled with the Report on the Physical Count of Inventories (RPCI) and Stock Cards (SC) prepared and maintained by the Supply Office. As a result, the accuracy of the Accountable Forms, Plates and Stickers Inventory account totaling P294,441.00 as of year-end is unreliable.

	

3)		Non-conduct of the Physical Count of Inventories.

	

	The Supply Officer of Roxas Main Campus was not able to submit the Report on the Physical Count of Inventories (RPCI) for the 2nd semester of CY 2020 to the Audit Team since the Inventory Committee of the University inspected only the PPE accounts acquired in CY 2020. 

	

In view of the above deficiencies, the accuracy of inventory accounts of Roxas Main Campus totaling P0.650 million as of year-end could not be ascertained.



This is a reiteration of our prior year’s audit observation (CY 2019 AAR) which was partially implemented.



We recommended and the Management agreed to:



a)	Direct the Accountant to make the necessary adjustments to reflect the accurate balance of the inventory accounts;



b)	Require the Supply Officer and the Accountant to perform reconciliation of the Report on the Physical Count of Inventories (RPCI) and Supplies Ledger Card (SLC) on a regular basis; and



c)	Direct the Inventory Committee to include all supplies on stock and semi-expendable properties in the conduct of semestral physical count of inventory items and submit the RPCI to the Office of the Auditor not later than July 31 of the year and January 31 of the succeeding year.



Unreleased Commercial Checks Not Reverted to Cash Account



7)	Unreleased commercial checks for various funds totaling P8.871 million were not adjusted and reverted back to the cash account at the end of the year, contrary to Section 56, Chapter 19 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs) Volume I, resulting in the understatement of Cash in Bank and corresponding Payable accounts by the same amount in the financial statements.



Section 56, Chapter 19 of the GAM for NGAs, Volume I provides that:

“Adjustments for Unreleased Checks. A Schedule of Unreleased Commercial Checks shall be prepared by the Cashier for submission to the Accounting Division/Unit. All unreleased checks at the end of the year shall be reverted back to the cash accounts. A JEV shall be prepared to recognize the restoration of the cash equivalent to the unreleased checks and the recognition of the appropriate liability/payable account. The accounting entry for the restoration of the unreleased check to the cash account shall be a debit to “Cash in Bank, Local Currency Current” account with credit to the appropriate liability account. There shall be no physical cancellation of the checks. The JEV supporting such restoration shall form part of the supporting document to the financial statements to be submitted to COA at year end. At the start of the ensuing year, another JEV shall be drawn to reverse the previous entry made and recognize the availability of the checks for release. This procedure shall not apply to account “Cash-Modified Disbursement System (MDS)” since there is no actual cash with the GSBs.”

Verification of accounts revealed that there were commercial checks issued from various funds totaling P8.871 million, as shown in the table below, which remained unreleased as of December 31, 2020. Most of these checks were received by concerned payees in the month of January, 2021 while others were still in the possession of the Cashier as of February 5, 2021.

----media/image14.emf----



Interview with the concerned Cashiers of the University revealed that they were not able to prepare and submit the Schedule of Unreleased Checks to their respective Accountants since they were not aware of such requirement. Consequently, the Accounting Office was not able to draw Journal Entry Vouchers to record the adjustment in reverting back said amount to cash-in-bank account and recognizing the appropriate payable accounts. This resulted in the understatement of Cash-in-Bank and Liability accounts in the financial statements as of December 31, 2020. 

We recommended and the Management agreed to direct the cashiers and the accountants to prepare the Schedule of Unreleased Checks and corresponding adjustments to be made as of year-end, respectively, in accordance with the provisions of GAM for NGAs Volume I.

Deficiencies in the Management, Control and Accounting of Petty Cash Fund



8)	Validity, propriety and accuracy of expenses charged to petty cash fund in the total amount of P0.773 million could not be ascertained due to the deficiencies in the management, control and accounting of the fund, contrary to Sections 35 and 36, Chapter 6 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM)  for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume I. 



Section 35 of the GAM for NGAs, Volume I, provides that:



“The Petty Cash Fund (PCF) to be set up shall be sufficient for the recurring petty operating expenses of the agency for one month. xxx. All replenishments shall be directly charged to the expense account and at all times, the PCF shall be equal to the total cash on hand and the unreplenished expenses. The PCF shall be replenished as soon as disbursements reach at least 75% or as needed.











Xxx



At the end of the year, the PCFC shall submit to the Accounting Division/Unit all unreplenished Petty Cash Vouchers (PCVs) for recording in the books of accounts.”



Further, Section 36 of the same manual also provides the following documentary requirements for the liquidation of the Petty Cash Fund (PCF) as follows:



1)	Report on Paid Petty Cash Vouchers (RPPCV) (Appendix 49);

2)	Approved purchase request with certificate of Emergency Purchase if necessary;

3)	Bill, receipts, sales invoices;

4)	Inspection and Acceptance Report (IAR) (Appendix 62);

5)	Waste Materials Report (WMR) (Appendix 65) in case of replacement/repair;

6)	Approved Trip Ticket, for gasoline/fuel expenses;

7)	Canvass from at least three suppliers for purchases involving P1,000 and above,

except for purchases made while on official travel;

8)	Summary/Abstract of Canvass;

9)	PCVs duly accomplished and signed; 

10)	OR in case of refund; 

11)	Toll receipts and trip tickets for reimbursement of toll receipts; and

12)	Such other supporting document that may be required. 



Table 14 shows the PCF replenishment for CY 2020 of the various Campuses and Satellite Colleges of the University.



----media/image15.emf----

Audit of the petty cash fund replenishments of the different Campuses and Satellite Colleges revealed the following deficiencies: (details shown in Appendices K-1)



1)	Petty cash fund replenishments lacked supporting documents as required under the Section 36 of the GAM for NGAs such as:



	a)	Approved purchase request with certificate of emergency purchase;

	b)	Inspection and Acceptance Report (IAR) (Appendix 62); 

	c)	Approved Trip Ticket, for gasoline/fuel expenses;

	d)	Canvass from at least three suppliers for purchases involving P1,000 and above, except for purchases made while on official travel; and

	e)	Summary/Abstract of Canvass.



In addition, meal expenses for guests were not adequately supported with Attendance Sheets and other supporting documents necessary to validate the propriety of the disbursements charged to the petty cash fund. The concerned personnel admitted to the deficiency and they will ensure compliance with the submission of the required documents by providing a checklist of the needed documents for every paid petty cash expenses.



2)	The Reports on Paid Petty Cash Vouchers (RPPCV) prepared by Pontevedra Campus and Sigma Satellite College did not conform to the format prescribed under the GAM for NGAs since they were not particular to the forms provided under the Manual. Nevertheless, they agreed to conform to the prescribed format of the RPPCV.  



3)	Box D of some PCVs were not duly accomplished and signed by the payees upon liquidation and there were PCVs which were unnumbered. The concerned PCF Custodians claimed that their failure to duly accomplish the PCV was not intended and that they merely overlooked the deficiency.



4)	The PCF was not replenished as soon as disbursements reached at least 75 percent of the total amount of Petty Cash Fund. It was likewise observed that the PCF Custodians made replenishments when petty cash fund disbursements reached an average of 83 to 99 percent. There were some PCF Custodian who admitted lack of knowledge with regard to the requirement. While there were some who attributed the deficiency to the delay in submission of liquidation with supporting documents by the requestors. As a result of delay in replenishment, there is a risk that the PCF may be insufficient when it is needed for the University’s operations.



5)	Pursuant to the GAM for NGAs, the Petty Cash Fund (PCF) to be set up shall be sufficient for the recurring petty operating expenses of the agency for one month. However, it was noted that for Pontevedra Campus, the PCF under the Business Related Fund amounting to P10,000.00 was overestimated considering that only one replenishment was made during the current year covering paid expenses for 12 months, from November 2019 to October 2020. The PCF Custodian said that she was waiting for the disbursements to reach at least 75 percent before making the replenishment hence, the delay in liquidation. Therefore, the necessity and the propriety of the established PCF is unreliable. 



It was also noted that expenses related to the Fishpond Project, an Income Generating Project of Dayao Satellite College, amounting to P5,640.00 (Appendix K-2) were erroneously charged to the Petty Cash Fund, under the Internally Generated Fund (IGF) instead of charging it to Business Related Fund (BRF).





6)	Expenses were not charged to proper accounts by the Accountant of Roxas Main, Pontevedra and Burias Campuses. There were replenishments wherein all expenses were charged to Other Supplies & Materials Expense or Other Maintenance and Operating Expense account although these replenishments consisted of disbursements for purchases of office supplies. The Accountant of Pontevedra Campus commented that these transactions were not included in their budget since they did not expect the specific expenses to be incurred during the period. Thus, the Budget and Accounting Unit instead use a related expense account that can cover the petty cash expenses. This resulted in the overstatement and understatement of the pertinent expense accounts.



7)	Unreplenished PCVs as of year-end amounting to P49,475.06, as shown in Table 15, were not recorded by the Accounting Unit in the books of accounts contrary to Section 35 of the GAM for NGAs.

----media/image16.emf----























The aforementioned section of the Manual provides that the unused balance of the PCF shall not be closed or refunded at the end of the year. Rather, the Fund shall be closed only upon termination, separation, retirement or dismissal of the PCF Custodian, who in turn shall refund any balance to close his cash accountability. The PCF Custodian is further mandated to submit to the Accounting Unit all unreplenished Petty Cash Vouchers for recording in the books at the end of the year. Interview with the Petty Cash Custodians, however, disclosed that they were not given instruction to submit to the Accounting Unit all unreplenished petty cash expenses at year end and thus, the same were not recorded by the Accounting Unit in the books of accounts. Consequently, the balance of the pertinent expense accounts reflected in the financial statements are understated.



As a result of the deficiencies noted, the validity, propriety and accuracy of expenses charged to petty cash fund amounting to P0.773 million cannot be ascertained.



We recommended and the Management agreed to:



	a)	Direct the PCF Custodians to: 



a.1. Ensure that PCF payments are duly supported with complete documentations;

	

	a.2. Promptly monitor the balance of the PCF in order to enable the replenishment of such as soon as disbursements reach at least 75 percent; and

	

	a.3. Submit to the Accounting Unit all unreplenished PCVs at the end of the year for recording in the books of accounts;

	

	b)	Direct the Accountants to evaluate the amount of PCF of each PCF Custodian to determine whether there is a need to increase, decrease or liquidate the fund; and



	c)	Direct the Accountant of Roxas Main, Pontevedra and Burias Campuses to record the disbursements out of the PCF in the appropriate expense accounts classification. 

	

Improper Monitoring of Properties Acquired Through Fund Transfers



9)	Proper monitoring and accountability for properties acquired through Fund Transfers from other Government Agencies amounting to P4.136 million were not ensured, due to non-preparation of the required reports by the Supply Officer and the Accountant, contrary to Chapter 10, Volume I of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), thus, rendered the existence and completeness of these properties as of year-end unreliable.



Section 17, Chapter 10, Volume I, of the GAM for NGAs, provides:



“Sec. 17. Acquisition of PPE through Fund Transfer to other Government Agencies or Civil Society Organizations

 

Implementation of projects through funds transferred to other government agencies may require the acquisition of the necessary PPE. For proper monitoring and accountability, the following policies shall be followed:



a. Acquisition by Source Agency/Entity.

    1.  xxx.

	    2. The source agency/entity shall monitor the PPE purchased out of transferred     funds to other government agencies but shall not record the PPE until it is returned by the implementing agency.

    3. The depreciation of recorded PPE shall be in accordance with Sec. 28 of this Chapter.



b. Acquisition by Implementing Agency/Entity.

    1. The funds received from inter-agency fund transfer shall be recorded in the fund cluster for trust receipts as asset.

    2. The implementing agency/entity shall record and monitor the PPE purchased out of inter-agency transferred funds when the PPE meets the recognition criteria. xxx.”



The University is a recipient of various funds under Inter-Agency Transferred Fund (IATF). A Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) was entered into by and between the University and various Source Agencies (SA) indicating therein their roles, responsibilities, duration of the project and ownership of acquired equipment and facilities, among others.



Verification of various projects implemented by the University disclosed the acquisition of some Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) and Inventory items through fund transfers from other government agencies as shown in the Table 16.



----media/image17.emf----



For Project No. 1 - Soil and Plant Testing Laboratory, the equipment and glassware were acquired by the Sugar Regulatory Administration (SRA), the source agency and subsequently bequeathed to Pontevedra Campus by virtue of the Deeds of Donation dated April 23, 2019 and May 2, 2018. 



Pursuant to Section 21, Chapter 5, Volume I, of the GAM for NGAs, “An entity shall recognize an asset in respect of transfers when the transferred resources meet the definition of an asset and satisfy the criteria for recognition as an asset.”  In addition, Section 11, Chapter 10, Volume I, of the GAM for NGAs states that PPE acquired through a non-exchange transaction, such as donation, presidential proclamation, taxes, transfers and grants, its cost shall be measured at its fair value as at the date of acquisition. Pontevedra Campus, being the owner of the properties by virtue of donation, shall record and properly monitor such properties in its books.



Interview with the Accountant of Pontevedra Campus revealed that there was no record of the laboratory items acquired per Deed of Donation dated May 2, 2018 in the books of accounts because of the difficulty in the determination of the amount to be recognized in the books per item, since the glassware has a lump sum price of P0.800 million as per Memorandum of Agreement (MOA). In accordance with Section 8 (f), Chapter 10, Volume I, of the GAM for NGAs, “In case the acquisition of PPE is at a lump sum price, the cost shall be apportioned to the asset acquired in order to have proper basis for computing depreciation. The purchase cost shall be distributed based on the relative fair value of the assets acquired. The cost of several PPE purchased at lump sum price per set/group/lot shall be allocated to each PPE based on the breakdown of cost reflected in the invoice, if any. In the absence of such breakdown, the allocation of cost shall be based on the relative fair value of the assets acquired.”



In addition, the Supply Officer commented that the Laboratory Supplies and Equipment donated by the SRA were inadvertently excluded in the Report on the Physical Count of Property Plant and Equipment (RCPPE) and were not issued corresponding Property Card (PC) because said donation, delivery and issuance of the same were not coursed through the Supply Office. He was not even informed of the said donation/project. 



Meanwhile, the Accountant remarked that their failure to maintain the Property, Plant and Equipment Ledger Card (PPELC) for the donated Laboratory Supplies and Equipment was due to the fact that necessary documents were not provided, such as the invoice, delivery receipt and other documents, and that the Property Acknowledgement Receipt was provided only recently by the Project-In-Charge.



For Project No. 2 - Botanical Dewormer for Free Range Native Chickens, Project No. 3 - Tissue Culture Laboratory, Project No. 4 - Yolanda Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Program (YRRP) and Project No. 5 - DOST-PCAARRD National Agriculture and Aquaculture Technology Business Incubation Program (TBI), the equipment were purchased by Dumarao Satellite College, Tapaz Satellite College, Burias Campus and Central Admin, respectively, using funds received from different source agencies as shown in Table 15. Section 17 (b.2), Chapter 10, Volume I, of the GAM for NGAs states that the implementing agency/entity shall record and monitor the PPE purchased out of inter-agency transferred funds when the PPE meets the recognition criteria.



Review of the MOA for Project 2 disclosed that supplies, materials and other properties authorized to be purchased using project funds shall be the direct responsibility of the implementing agency subject to the existing government accounting and auditing rules. Also, the MOA for Project 3 requires that the grantee shall separately keep and maintain any/all necessary accounting books and records for the project. The MOA for Project 5 similarly mandates that all equipment purchased shall be entered in the institution’s books on inventory of equipment.



Upon audit, however, it was disclosed that there were no reports such as Property Card (PC) and Property Plant and Equipment Ledger Card (PPELC) prepared by the Supply Officer and Accountant, respectively, to account for the properties acquired totaling P4.136 million. Moreover, only the equipment acquired per Deed of Donation dated May 2, 2018 (Project No. 1) and equipment purchased for the Botanical Dewormer project (Project No. 2) were issued with proper Property Acknowledgment Receipt (PAR) (See Appendices L-1 to L-2). 



Additionally, two laptops and one printer purchased for the Business Incubation Program project (Project No. 5) were not issued with a proper Property Acknowledgment Receipt (PAR) (See Appendix L-3). 



With these, proper monitoring and accountability could not be ensured, thus, rendered the existence and completeness of the PPE acquired under IATF projects as of December 31, 2020 unreliable.



We recommended and the Management agreed to:



a)	Observe strictly the guidelines on the acquisition of properties out of Fund Transfers in accordance with Sections 8(f), 11 and 17, Chapter 10, Volume I, of the GAM for NGAs so as to record these properties to their appropriate account for monitoring and accountability;



b)	Direct the Supply Officer and the Accountant to prepare and maintain reports such as RPCPPE, PC, PPELC to account for these properties totaling P4.136 million. Such reports must contain information as to the ownership of the properties, as agreed by the Source Agency and the Implementing Agency in the Memorandum of Agreement, so that proper actions can be made by the management upon completion/termination of the project; and



c)	Require the Supply Officer and the Accountant to reconcile their individual reports with the control accounts and verify and adjust immediately any discrepancies.



Unsupported Trust Liabilities



10)	Absence of detailed schedules and supporting documents  resulted to the difficulty in validating the Trust Liability account in the amount of P0.753 million  contrary to Sections 111 and 114 of Presidential Decree (P.D) No. 144 and the Government Accounting Manual (GAM), hence, the balance reflected in the financial statements as of year-end cannot be verified.  Likewise, erroneous charging of Property, Plant and Equipment accounts to Trust Liability in the amount of P0.690 million, resulted in the overstatement and understatement of the related accounts in the financial statements. 



Pertinent sections of P.D. 1445 provide that “(Sec.111) The accounts of an agency shall be kept in such detail as is necessary to meet the needs of the agency and at the same time be adequate to furnish the information needed by fiscal or control agencies of the government. (Sec.114) Subsidiary records shall be kept where necessary.”



In Volume II of GAM for NGAs, it provides that Subsidiary Ledger form shall be used to show the details for each control account in the General Ledger (GL) which is maintained per account and fund cluster by the Accounting Division/Unit.



Verification of the accounts of the University disclosed the following:



1)	Trust Liabilities amounting to P0.753 million, as shown in Table 17 below, were unaccounted and not supported with Subsidiary Ledgers hence, the balance reflected in the financial statements could not be ascertained.

----media/image18.emf----













	Of the total Trust Liabilities in the agency’s financial statement of P21.202 million, P0.753 million were unaccounted for and not supported with ledgers. Based on the schedule submitted by the Accounting Unit of Central Administration, the unaccounted balance of P75,000.00 under the Internally Generated Fund (IGF) remained dormant since 2015. For Pontevedra Campus, the amount of P335,907.00 reflected the unaccounted prior year balance which is aged over one year to two years based on the submitted schedule of payables. Meanwhile, the unaccounted balance of P341,888.33 for Burias Campus were aged under 91-365 days. The Accountants are now on the process of retrieving the relevant documents to support and reconcile the unaccounted Trust Liabilties. The newly designated Accountant of Pontevedra Campus added that the difficulty in reconciling the account on her part was due to the lack of proper turn-over of documents from the previous Accountant. 

	

	In view thereof, the balance of the Trust Liabilities account could not be verified. 

	

2)	Property, Plant and Equipment (PPEs) and Semi-Expendables totaling P0.690 million, as shown in Table 18, donated to Sigma Satellite College were erroneously credited to Trust Liabilities account contrary to the Government Accounting Manual (GAM).

----media/image19.emf----

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	Chapter 10 of the GAM provides for the guidelines in the recognition of PPE acquired through donation with or without condition. For those acquired through donation without condition, the fair value of the PPE shall be recognized as Income from Grants and Donations in Kind. On the other hand, where a PPE is acquired through donation with conditions or restrictions, a liability account specifically Other Deferred Credits account shall be recognized until the conditions or restrictions have been fulfilled.

	

	Interview with the concerned personnel of CapSU Sigma disclosed that the PPE and semi-expendables, shown in Table 17, were donated to the College. For the FLP Building, it was donated to the College by the Student Officers of the Future Leaders of the Philippines (FLP), a student organization in the College. However, there were no documents on file to support that the same was donated because of the absence of proper turn-over of documents from the previous in charge. They assured that efforts will be exerted to secure the same. Consequently, ownership of these PPE could not be established due to the absence of the relevant documents.

	

	Further, the PPE and semi-expendables were recognized under the appropriate PPE and Inventory accounts but these were credited to the Trust Liabilities account instead of Income from Grants and Donations in Kind or Other Deferred Credits, whichever is applicable. The understatement and overstatement of related accounts affected the accuracy of the financial statements as of year-end.

Moreover, the validity and existence of the Trust Liability account reflected in the financial statements as of year-end could not be established.



We recommended and the Management agreed to require the concerned Accountants to: 



a)	Obtain the details and supporting documents of the unaccounted trust liabilities and strictly maintain a ledger for every account; 



b)	Secure the necessary documents such as Deed of Donation to support the various PPEs and Semi-expendable Equipment donated to the University; and



c)	Prepare the necessary adjustments to reflect the accurate balance of the Trust Liabilities account.



Prior Years’ Expenses Obligated/Utilized and Paid from Current Year’s Allotment/Approved Budget



11)	Prior Years’ transactions totaling P3.809 million were paid from current year’s budget contrary to Section 119 of Presidential Decree (P.D.) No. 1445 and Section 6, Chapter 2 of the Government Accounting Manual for National Government Agencies Volume I, thus, rendered the validity and legality of the recorded transactions unreliable.



Section 119 of P.D. No. 1445 provides that “all lawful expenditures and obligations incurred during the year shall be taken up in the accounts of that year.”

Section 6, Chapter 2, Volume I of the GAM for NGAs, provides the basic government accounting and budget reporting principles, on which each entity shall recognize and present its financial transactions and operation. One of the basic reporting principles, Item b, is the accrual basis of accounting in accordance with the PPSAS.

PPSAS 1/IPSAS 1-Presentation of Financial Statements define Accrual Basis as follows:

“Accrual basis means a basis of accounting under which transactions and other events are recognized when they occur (and not only when cash or its equivalent is received or paid).  Therefore, the transactions and events are recorded in the accounting records and recognized in the financial statements of the period to which they relate.  The elements recognized under accrual accounting are assets, liabilities, net assets/equity, revenue, and expenses.” (Emphasis supplied)

Audit of accounts disclosed that various transactions totaling P3.809 million, for delivered goods and services, and other expenditures such as salaries and wages, honoraria, scholarship expenses, travelling expenses, fuel, oil and lubricants, etc., incurred in the prior years were improperly  paid from current year’s allotment/approved budget as indicated in the succeeding table:  

----media/image20.emf----















It was noted further that the total amount of P2.624 million pertaining to 2019 expenses were recorded either as current assets or expenses upon actual disbursement in CY 2020 as shown in Appendix M.

	In addition, the total amount of P0.660 million and P0.526 million on various transactions were recognized in the books as of December 31, 2019 as Accounts Payable and Due to Officers and Employees respectively, despite the absence of Obligations Request and Status (ORS) or Budget Utilization Request and Status (BURS) issued in the year these transactions were incurred.

	The concerned Budget Officer of Pontevedra Campus informed the Audit Team that the previous Accountant and previous Campus Administrator approved the transactions of prior years to be disbursed in the current year.  For Burias Campus, prior years’ unobligated/unutilized expenditures were paid in the current year because funds in those years were insufficient to cover incurred expenses. Further, she will ensure that all valid expenditures in the current year be obligated/utilized only in the current year’s allotment/approved budget.

This practice affects the cash programming and disrupts the effective operation of the current year’s budgetary allocation since this has been used to pay off prior years’ unobligated expenditures. 

Accordingly, charging of prior years’ transactions against the current year’s allotment/approved budget is contrary to Section 119 of P.D. No. 1445, thus rendered the validity and legality of the recorded transactions unreliable.









We recommended and the Management agreed to:

	

a)		Direct the Budget Officer to ensure that only valid expenditures in the current year be obligated/utilized out of the current year’s allotment/approved budget;

	

b)			Require the Accountant to:

	

	b.1. Recognize liability/payable accounts only for those transactions which have valid obligations and have actual delivery of goods and services; and 

	b.2. Strictly comply with the provision on Public Sector Accounting Standards (PPSAS)/International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) in accrual basis of accounting.

Unsupported Payment of Honoraria as Resource Person



12)	The grant of honoraria to the Regional Director of Commission on Higher Education (CHED) Region VI as resource person during board meetings amounting to P31,250.00 and P17,000.00 for CY 2019 and 2020, respectively, was bereft of legal basis, thus, improper and disallowable in audit.



Sections 58 and 53 of the General Provisions of the General Appropriations Act for FY 2019 and 2020, respectively, provides that honoraria may be paid only to the following:



1)	Teaching personnel of the DepEd, TESDA, SUCs and other educational institutions, engaged in actual classroom teaching, whose teaching load is outside of the regular office hours or in excess of the regular load;

2)	Those who act as lecturers, resource persons, coordinators and facilitators in seminars, training programs, and other similar activities in training institutions;

3)	Chairpersons and members of commissions, boards, councils, and other similar entities, including personnel thereof who are not paid salaries, nor per diems but compensated in the form of honoraria as provided by laws, rules and regulations;

4)	Those who are involved in science and technological activities and render services beyond their regular workload;

5)	Officials and employees assigned to special projects; and

6)	Officials and employees authorized to receive honoraria under R.A. No. 9184 and its IRR.



It was observed that for CY 2019 and 2020, honoraria in the amounts of P31,250.00 (Appendix N-1) and P17,000.00 (Appendix N-2), respectively, were paid by the University to the CHED Regional Director. Perusal of the disbursement vouchers and interview with the Accountant revealed that the CHED Regional Director was paid the honoraria for her attendance to the Board Meetings as resource person. Apparently, this type of honorarium granted is not among those enumerated in the aforecited regulations for entitlement to honorarium, thus bereft of legal basis. 



Likewise, among the documents provided by the agency to support the payment of honoraria to the CHED Regional Director is CHED Resolution No. 100-2018 signed by J. Prospero E. de Vera, III, CHED Chairman, mandating all CHED Regional Directors to attend meetings of SUCs governing boards for the specific purpose of ensuring that the SUC get the certificate of program compliance first before offering any program (Annex N-3).



Honoraria for those who act as lecturer and resource persons is governed by DBM Budget Circular 2007-1 dated April 23, 2007 which provides in part, the following:



“Section 2.3. A resource person is any person who by virtue of his /her expertise on a specific subject area, serves as speaker in seminars, conferences, symposia, training programs and similar activities.” 



“Section 4.5.  Honoraria shall not be granted to the designated lecturer, resource persons and facilitators within their respective sponsoring agencies as such services are deemed part of the duties and responsibilities of their appointive positions to disseminate information, to clarify issues and concerns and to interact with clients and or implementers of agency mandates.”



One of the functions of the CHED Regional Office as indicated in the CHED website (Annex N.4) is to monitor and evaluate the performance of Higher Education Institutions in the region in terms of compliance to minimum standards for various higher education programs. Thus, the attendance of the CHED Regional Director in various board meetings of the University in line with the pursuance of the CHED’s mandate, is deemed part of the duties and responsibilities of the CHED Regional Director’s appointive position and therefore covered by limitations provided in Section 4.5 of the DBM Budget Circular 2007-1.



The above circumstances point out to the absence of legal basis in the grant of honoraria to the CHED Regional Director thus, the disbursement is considered improper and disallowable in audit.



This is reiteration of CY 2019 audit observation which was not implemented in CY 2020 because according to the management, other State Universities and Colleges in the Region also granted said honorarium to the CHED Regional Director.



We recommended that the Management:



a)	Settle the total amount P48,250.00 once the corresponding Notices of Disallowance are issued. 



b)	Discontinue the practice of granting honoraria and other forms of allowances in the absence of legal basis.



Improper Charging of Expenses



13)	Regular expenditures of Capiz State University - Burias Campus totaling P61,325.29 were improperly charged to Yolanda Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Program (YRRP) of the Department of Agriculture-Regional Field Office VI (DA RFO VI), contrary to Section 4(3) of Presidential Decree No. 1445, thus depleted the fund intended for the said program and adversely affecting its implementation.



Presidential Decree No. 1445, otherwise known as the, “Government Auditing Code of the Philippines”, provides the fundamental principles governing the financial transactions and operations of any government agency. Section 4(3) of P.D. No. 1445 expressly provides that “Trust Funds shall be available and may be spent only for the specific purpose for which the trust was created or the funds received.”



The Department of Agriculture Regional Field Office VI (DA RFO VI), Capiz State University – Burias Campus and the Western Visayas Agriculture, Aquatic and Natural Resources Research and Development Consortium (WESVAARRDEC) have entered into an agreement to help Yolanda Typhoon victims through the Yolanda Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Program (YRRP) with the DA RFO VI as the Funding Agency, CapSU Burias as the Implementing Agency, and WESVAARRDEC as the Monitoring Agency.



The University has the obligation to produce 8,200 heads of native chicken breeder stock to be delivered at identified drop-off points and to conduct training on Native Chicken Production Technology to all identified beneficiaries.



Audit of the financial transactions under YRRP disclosed that regular expenses such as electricity totaling P61,325.29, for the period March 8, 2020 to May 14, 2020 of the whole Capiz State University – Burias Campus were paid using the funds of the said project. Details are shown in the succeeding table.



----media/image21.emf----

Interview with the project leader of YRRP disclosed that since the start of the implementation of the project, no electricity was charged because of the absence of allocation for electricity as per original Line Item Budget (LIB) of the project. Nonetheless, production of chicken, specifically referring from eggs to chicks uses four units of Artificial Incubator for hatching (24/7), from hatching to hardening stage as artificial heater for chicks utilizes daily (24/7) an incandescent bulb for an average of 15 bulbs, one unit electric motor for water supply to the project and the four perimeter lighting during night time. These type of resources and equipment are important requirements for production accounts that hike on electricity bill of the campus which resulted to the revision of the LIB with the inclusion of allocation for electricity.  



However, it must be also noted that no electric meter was provided for the project, thus, consumption of the project’s electric power could not be determined.  



In spite of the budget allocation for electricity in the revised LIB, it has been directed under PD No. 1445 that the fund should be spent only for the specific purpose for which the trust fund was created or the funds received. Thus, only the electric consumption specifically for the production of native chicken breeder stock shall be charged to the funds of said project.



Improper charging of the regular expense of the University on the YRRP funds controverts the fundamental principle of disbursement under PD No. 1445. Further, the funds of said program which could have been utilized for the specific purpose it was intended was erroneously used, adversely affecting the implementation of the program.



We recommended and the Management agreed to:



c)	Ensure that the fund of the YRRP Project is utilized for the direct and indirect costs as detailed in the Line Item Budget of the Project and spent only for the specific purpose for which the trust fund was created or the funds received;



d)	Discontinue the charging of regular expenses of the University from the fund allocated for a specific project; and



e)	Install an electric meter specifically for the YRRP to determine the project’s actual electric power consumption.



Deficiencies in the Collective Negotiation Agreement (CNA) Incentive Grant

			

14)	Available savings from the allowable Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) allotments in the Regular Agency Fund (RAF) totaling P17.425 million granted for the payment of CY 2020 Collective Negotiation Agreement (CNA) Incentive of 734 University personnel are unreliable, as substantial amount of the same MOOE items were charged to Internally Generated Fund (IGF). 



Item 4.3.1 of DBM Budget Circular No. 2020-5 dated November 4, 2020, Guidelines on the Grant of Collective Negotiation Agreement (CNA) Incentive for FY 2020, provides that:



“The CNA Incentive shall be sourced solely from the available balances of allowable Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) allotments after considering the  FY 2020 requirements and compliance with the COVID-19 measures prescribed under Republic Acts No.11469 and 11494, provided further that the same have become available as a result of cost-cutting and systems improvement measures undertaken collectively by the agency and its personnel, as identified in their respective CNA and supplements thereof. Such fund sources shall be limited to the following MOOE items defined under the Government Accounting and Auditing Manual:



	a)		Advertising Expenses;

	b)		Communication Expenses;

	c)		Printing and Publication Expenses;

	d)		Repairs and Maintenance;

	e)		Subscription Expenses;

	f)		Supplies and Materials Expenses;

	g)		Transportation and Delivery Expenses;

	h)		Traveling Expenses; and

	i)		Utility Expenses.”



Verification of disbursements and records disclosed that of the total amount of P17.628 million declared as savings by the management from the available balance of allowable MOOE allotments of Regular Agency Fund (RAF), P17.425 million was allocated and granted as CNA Incentives for CY 2020, as presented in Table 21.  



	----media/image22.emf----

Based on the guidelines/criteria for granting of CNA Incentives, 734 personnel of the University availed the said incentives as shown in Table 22. 



----media/image23.emf----



As presented in Table 23, the agency received a total MOOE allotment of P25.410 million for RAF in CY 2020.  The percentage of Obligation to Allotment (for RAF) as of December 31, 2020 was P7.686 million or 30.25 percent.  It was observed however,  that a substantial amount of similar expenditures were utilized/charged to IGF or Special Trust Fund (STF) for the same period amounting to P13.928 million indicating that IGF has been used even though RAF has not been fully utilized.  See details in Appendix P attached.



	----media/image24.emf----



Relative to the foregoing, the existence of the amount of P17.628 million representing the excess of total MOOE allotment received and actual obligations creates an impression that savings have been generated through cost-cutting and systems improvement measures thus declared as savings for purposes of CNA grant. Nevertheless, the amount of P17.425 million granted as CNA incentive are unreliable since the availability of said savings were not actually due to the implementation of the cost-cutting and systems improvement measures undertaken collectively by the University and its personnel but because of the charging of said MOOE accounts to IGF, in order to generate available savings for RAF as required for the grant of said incentive.



Section 2.2 of COA Circular No. 2000-02 dated April 4, 2000, Accounting Guidelines and Procedures on the Use of Income of SUCs pursuant to R.A. No, 8292, states that, “The STF shall be used to augment the maintenance and other operating expenses and capital outlays of the university and to pay authorized allowances and fringe benefits to teachers and students who render services to the school.” 



This is a reiteration of prior year’s audit (CY 2019 AAR) observation which was not implemented. 



We recommended that the Management: 



a)	Discontinue the charging of allowable MOOE accounts from Internally Generated Fund (IGF) without  exhausting first the allocated amount in Regular Agency Fund (RAF), to circumvent generating false savings from RAF for the grant of CNA Incentives; and 



b)	Identify the specific cost-cutting measures used in the CNA by presenting data/indicators as a result of the joint efforts of labor and management and systems/productivity/income improvement.



The management replied that they have programmed the charges for the Regular Agency Fund (RAF) in order to maximize the utilization of MOOE, however, because of the pandemic, most of their budget remained unspent as of October of 2020 which is the cut-off date in the determination of savings for CNA purpose. On the other hand, the management needs also to disburse from the Internally Generated Fund (IGF) since the utilization of said fund is also being monitored by the Board of Regents and Department of Budget and Management.



Likewise, the cost cutting measures are stated in the Joint Resolution between the CAPSUFFEA and the Management of CapSU such as control on electrical and other utilities consumptions, minimizing travels, suspension of unnecessary communication expenses and regulation of costly purchases.



Auditor’s Rejoinder    



It is noted that this is a reiteration of CY 2019 audit observation. The Audit Team maintains its stand that the significant amount of P16.847 million or 71.54 percent and P17.425 million or 68.57 percent declared as savings from allowable MOOE allotments in CYs 2019 and 2020 respectively, granted by the University as CNA Incentives to its employees, indicate that there is an intention on the part of the management to generate such savings.  It was observed that most of the charges were utilized from IGF. 



Likewise the audit team was not provided with any policies or guidelines in the implementation of said cost cutting measures stated in the CapSU and CAPSUFEA Joint Resolution. 



Non-use of BIR Electronic Filing and Payment System (eFPS)



15)	Non-filing of tax returns and payment of taxes totaling P1.753 million through Electronic Filing and Payment System (eFPS), contrary to pertinent provisions of Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) Revenue Regulations 1-2013 dated January 23, 2013, resulted in wrong venue filing and incurrence of corresponding penalties. Likewise, transparency and efficiency in revenue collection reporting and reconciliations could not be attained.



Pertinent provisions of BIR Revenue Regulation No. 1-2013 provides the following:

Paragraph 4 

	“Now that Electronic Tax Remittance Advice (eTRA) System, a sub-system of the eFPS has been developed, the base of taxpayers mandated to use eFPS is expanded to include all National Government Agencies (NGAs) since the latter make use of the TRA in settlement of their withholding tax liabilities arising from the use of funds being released by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM).”

Section 5

	“xxx. In addition, NGA shall also enroll with any authorized agent bank (AAB) where it intends to pay through the bank debit system, in cases of remittance of withheld taxes on funds not coming from the DBM or the payment of internal revenue taxes thru cash and not thru TRA.”

Section 7

	“xxx. The use of eTRA as payment is limited only to the NGAs’ tax liabilities arising from the use of funds coming from the DBM. NGAs’ tax liabilities arising from the use of funds other than those coming from DBM based on the NGAs Annual Budget as approved under the General Appropriation Act (GAA) must be paid using cash through the bank debit system of the AAB where the NGA shall enrol for this purpose. A separate tax return must be accomplished for these tax liabilities since a particular fund is required to have a separate branch code”.

	Further, imposition of penalties are provided in Section 3 of the Revenue Regulations 5-2015 dated March 17, 2015.

	“All taxpayers, under existing issuances, who are mandatorily covered to file their returns using eFPS or eBIRForms, who fail to do so, shall be imposed a penalty of One Thousand Pesos (P1,000) per return pursuant to Section 250 of the NIRC of 1997, as amended.

	In addition, the taxpayer, shall also be imposed civil penalties equivalent to 25% of the tax due to be paid, for filing a return in a manner not in compliance with existing regulations, thus tantamount to wrong venue filing pursuant to Section 248 (A) (2) of the NIRC of 1997, as amended.” 

The Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) mandated all National Government Agencies (NGAs), including their branches and extension offices, which have their own disbursement functions to use the eFPS in filing of returns and payment of taxes. 

However, it was observed that all campuses and satellite colleges of the University, except for Roxas Main and Pontevedra Campuses, were still using the manual filing of returns and payment of taxes on their remittances of withholding taxes on government money payments such as expanded withholding tax, value-added tax and percentage tax. According to the Accountants, they were not able to enroll in the eFPS due to the difficulty in processing of enrollment with the authorized agent banks of BIR. However, the management noted this deficiency and already issued an office memorandum to discuss the requirements needed in enrolling and ensure full compliance thereof.  



As shown in the table below, total taxes from said transactions, in the amount of P1.753 million, were withheld and remitted to the Authorized Agent Banks (AAB) of BIR through manual filing. Please see attached Appendices Q-1 to Q-8 for details. 

----media/image25.emf----

















Non-compliance with BIR regulations on electronic filing and payment of tax liabilities through internet banking facilities of AAB resulted in wrong venue filing of returns and will cause the imposition of penalties by the BIR. Moreover, non-use of eFPS, does not facilitate transparency and efficiency in revenue collection reporting and reconciliation since concerned parties cannot view and record on real time the remittances made by the NGAs.

We recommended and the Management agreed to: 



a)		Strictly comply with the provisions on electronic filing and payment system as provided in  BIR Revenue Regulations 1-2013; and

	

b)		Direct the Accountants or the Authorized Withholding Agents of the University to enroll with the AAB of BIR where they intend to remit the taxes through the bank debit system.



Non-submission of Statement of Obligations, Disbursements and Liquidations of Balances (SODLB)



16)	Non-submission of Statement of Obligations, Disbursements and Liquidations of  Balances for Inter-Agency Fund Transfer stating the information on fund transferred by the University to Department of Public Works and Highways in the amount of P40.000 million is contrary to pertinent provisions of the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and Commission of Audit (COA) Joint Circular 2019-1, thus, timely and effective reporting, monitoring and tracking of status of fund transferred, needed by the oversight bodies, could not be achieved. 



Pertinent provisions of DBM-COA Joint Circular No. 2019-1 dated January 1, 2019 state that:



		“4.1.3.Prescribing new reporting forms to monitor the transferred funds from the department/central office (OO)/regional Office (RO)/operating unit (OU) to the implementing agency/unit and to track utilization status of trust receipts.”

	

		“4.1.3.1 FAR No. 1-C (Statement of Obligations, Disbursements, Liquidations and Balances for Inter-Agency Fund Transfers).”

	

		“4.3 Departments/Agencies/OUs shall accomplish and submit BFARs to COA, DBM and to BTr, as applicable through the URS, in accordance with the timelines prescribed in the pertinent section of the GP of the GAA for the Budget Year, to wit:

	

	Within 30 days after the end of each quarter

	xxx

	

	FAR No. 1-C

	xxx “

	

The University transferred the amount P40.000 million to the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) 2nd District Engineering Office per Check No. 10932021 dated January 30, 2020 for the implementation of school building construction of CapSU Sapian Satellite College.



Verification of Budget and Financial Accountability Reports (BFARs) for CY 2020 disclosed that the University, being the source agency, did not prepare and submit the quarterly Statement of Obligations, Disbursement and Liquidations of Balances (SODLB) for Inter-Agency Fund Transfer or FAR I-C.  The concerned Budget Officer and Accountant commented that they misinterpreted the guidelines in preparing the FAR forms because they thought that there would be a double reporting if the said amount will be reported in FAR 1-C since it was already included in FAR 1 and 1-A as continuing appropriation. Accordingly, timely and adequate information needed by the oversight bodies such as DBM and COA, to report, monitor and track the status of utilization of fund, could not be made. 



We recommended and the Management agreed to require the Budget Officer and Accountant to strictly comply with the preparation and submission of SODLB for Inter-Agency Fund Transfer (FAR 1-C) as provided in DBM-COA JC No. 2019-1.

Non-submission of Contracts and Purchase Orders



17)	The guidelines on submission of Contracts and Purchase Orders were not complied with for transactions totaling P39.356 million in violation of pertinent Sections of COA Circular No. 2009-001 dated February 12, 2009 and COA Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012, hence a timely review and evaluation of said contracts and purchase orders were not made possible, and likewise resulted in the difficulty of ascertaining whether such contractual agreements entered into by the University are advantageous or disadvantageous.



Section 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 of COA Circular No. 2009-001 dated February 12, 2009 provide that within five (5) working days from the execution of a contract by the government or any of its subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities, including government-owned and controlled corporations and their subsidiaries, a copy of said contract and each of all the documents forming part thereof by reference or incorporation shall be furnished to the Auditor of the agency concerned. The copies of documents required to be submitted shall include but not limited to the following: 



a)		Invitation to Apply for Eligibility and to Bid; 

b)		Letter of Intent; 

c)		Eligibility Documents and Eligibility Data Sheet; 

d)		Eligibility Requirements; 

e)		Results of Eligibility Check/Screening; 

f)		Bidding Documents (Sec. 17.1, IRR-A, RA 9184); 

g)		Minutes of Pre-bid Conference, if applicable; 

h)		Agenda and/or Supplemental Bid Bulletins, if any; 

i)		Bidders Technical and Financial Proposals; 

j)		Minutes of Bid Opening; 

k)		Abstract of Bids; 

l)		Post Qualification Report of Technical Working Group; 

m)		BAC Resolution declaring winning bidder; 

n)		Notice of Post Qualification; 

o)		BAC Resolution recommending approval; 

p)		Notice of Award; 

q)		Contract Agreement; 

r)		Performance Security; 

s)		Program of Work and Detailed Estimates; 

t)		Certificate of Availability of Funds, Obligation Request; 

u)		Notice to Proceed 

v)		Such other documents peculiar to the contract and/or to the mode of procurement and considered necessary in the auditorial review and in the technical evaluation thereof.



Moreover, Section 3.2.1 of the same Circular provides that “a copy of any purchase order irrespective of amount, and each and every supporting document, shall, within five (5) working days from issuance thereof, be submitted to the Auditor concerned”. 



Item 9.2 of COA Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012 enumerates the documents to be submitted within five working days from the execution of the contracts, as required under COA Circular No. 2009-001, for procurement through Alternative Modes.



Review of the University’s submission of contracts and purchase orders for CY 2020 revealed the following deficiencies, to wit: 



1)	Non-submission of several contracts and purchase orders within the reglementary period contrary to the aforementioned Circular.



It was observed that the University’s submission of contracts and purchase orders were delayed ranging from 9-81 days and 1-110 days, respectively, as shown in Table 25.

----media/image26.emf----

















The concerned personnel said that they were not able to submit the contracts and purchase orders, together with its supporting documents, due to the delay in the transmittal of the required documents from the Bids and Awards Committee who has initial custody of the said documents. Meanwhile, some were not aware of the reglementary period in the submission thereof.



2)	Contracts attached to paid disbursement vouchers submitted, for transactions totaling         P14.474 million, were not submitted to the Auditor for the necessary auditorial review and technical evaluation. Also, not a single Purchase Order was submitted by the concerned personnel of Dayao, Mambusao and Tapaz Satellite Colleges to the Auditor for the current year because they were not aware of the required submission pursuant to the aforementioned circular.



3)	Submitted contracts and purchase orders were not completely supported with the required documents.



For Central Administration, Burias and Roxas Main Campus and Sigma Satellite College, purchase orders submitted to the auditor were only supported with purchase requests. It was observed that the lacking documents were attached as support to the Disbursement Vouchers instead of submitting these, together with the contracts and purchase orders, to the Auditor in accordance with COA Circular No. 2009-001. Also, it was noted that the dates of acceptance by the suppliers of various purchase orders were not duly indicated. The concerned personnel affirmed that they no longer submit the supporting documents pursuant to the said Circular since the same were already attached to the Disbursement Vouchers.



The above noted deficiencies precluded the review of relevant contracts and purchase orders in order to determine the University’s adherence to applicable rules and regulations on the procurement of goods and infrastructure projects. Also, it defeats the purpose of contract review which is to ascertain whether or not the contractual covenants entered into by the University are advantageous or disadvantageous. Moreover, timely review and appropriate evaluation by Auditor and information to the management of deficiencies noted, if any, were not made possible. 



	We recommended and the Management agreed to comply with the provisions of COA Circular No. 2009-001 on the submission of contracts and purchase orders together with supporting documents for timely review and evaluation.

	

Contract of Service not Aligned with the University’s Mandate/Thrusts



18)	Services of a priest engaged by Capiz State University (CapSU) as University Chaplain under Contract of Service and payment of P240,000.00 in consideration of his ecumenical service from the University funds are contrary to Joint Circular No. 1, series of 2017 of the Civil Service Commission (CSC), Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and Commission on Audit (COA), and Section 29 (2) Article VI of the 1987 Philippine Constitution, thus, rendered the transaction irregular. 



Government agencies have been authorized by various executive issuances and general appropriations acts to hire contractual personnel as part of their organization, in order to perform agency functions or specific vital activities or services which cannot be provided by a regular or permanent staff of the agency.



Corollary to this, the Civil Service Commission (CSC), Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and Commission on Audit (COA) issued Joint Circular No. 1, series of 2017 dated June 15, 2017, prescribing the rules and regulations governing contract of service and job order workers in the Government pertinent provisions of which state:

               

Section 2.0 “Government agencies are authorized to enter into service contracts with other government agencies, private firms, non-government agencies or individuals for services related or incidental to their respective functions xxx.” 



Section 5.1 “A Contract of Service is defined as the engagement of the services of an individual, private firm, other government agency, or non-government agency as consultant, learning service provider or technical expert to undertake special project or job within a specified period.”

		

Section 7.1 “Hiring under contract of service shall be limited to consultants, learning service providers and/or technical experts to undertake special project or job within the specified period.”



In the audit of financial transactions, it was noted that the University hired the services of a priest as University Chaplain through a Contract of Service dated January 29, 2020 with a monthly rate of ₱20,000.00 for the period January 6, 2020 to December 31, 2020. This is in consideration for the 40 hours per week ecumenical services on the nine campuses/satellite colleges of the University.



Among the functions of the University Chaplain stated in the Contract of Service are as follows:



a)	Design a campus ministry program to accommodate all University students irrespective of their religious affiliation;

b)	Assess University students’ spiritual development;

c)	Recommend to administration proper assistance to be extended to University students in terms of spiritual development;

d)	Coordinate with other University officials for student development; and

e)	Perform other functions beneficial to the University faculty, staff and student’s development.



It can be noted that the above-enumerated functions of the University Chaplain are not within the technical definition of contract of service as provided in CSC-DBM-COA Joint Circular No. 1 series of 2017. The University Chaplain is not a consultant, a learning service provider or a technical expert that warrants the hiring of his services under a Contract of Service agreement. Moreover, the services he rendered is not aligned or related to the mandate/thrusts of the University.  



The lack of authority of the University in hiring of contractual personnel to assume the functions of a University Chaplain and provide services which are not aligned/related to the mandate/thrusts of the hiring Agency rendered the disbursements thereof irregular. 



	COA Circular No. 2012-001 defined Irregular Expenditures as follows:

	

“Irregular expenditure” signifies an expenditure incurred without adhering to established rules, regulations, procedural guidelines, policies, principles or practices that have gained recognition of laws. Irregular expenditures are incurred if funds are disbursed without conforming with prescribed usages and rules of discipline. There is no observance of an established pattern, course, mode of action, behavior or conduct in the incurrence of an irregular expenditure. A transaction conducted in a manner that deviates or departs from or which does not comply with standards set is deemed irregular. A transaction which fails to follow or violates appropriate rules of procedure is, likewise, irregular.



Further verification of the documents disclosed the following deficiencies, to wit: 



1)		The Contract of Service was not furnished to the Office of the Auditor within five working days from its execution, thus, hindering timely auditorial review and evaluation of such contract contrary to Section 3.1.1 of COA Circular No. 2009-001 dated February 12, 2009, which states that “Within five (5) working days from the execution of a contract by the government or any of its subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities, including government-owned and controlled corporations and their subsidiaries, a copy of said contract and each of all the documents forming part thereof by reference or incorporation shall be furnished to the Auditor of the agency concerned.” It was submitted only as supporting document to the Disbursement Voucher in the initial payment.

	In addition, said contract of service was only executed by both parties on January 29, 2020, while the chaplain had already rendered his services on January 6, 2020 which was earlier than the date of execution, thus, the validity of the contract entered by the University is unreliable.  

	

2)		Disbursement made for the year totaling P240,000.00 (details are shown in Appendix S) recorded as Other General Services account were either charged to Regular Agency Fund (RAF) or  Internally Generated Fund, thus, availability of fund for the said contract of service is not definite.  Section 36, Chapter 2 of the Government Accounting Manual for National Government Agencies (GAM for NGAs) Volume I  provides that disbursements of government funds shall comply with the following basic requirements and certifications to include among others: “(c) Availability of funds certified by the Chief Accountant. The Head of the Accounting Unit shall certify the availability of funds before an Agency Head or his duly authorized representative enter into any contract that involves the expenditure of public funds based on the copy of budget release documents.”

	

3)		Aside from the copy of contract and daily time records, Accomplishment Reports were not among the documents attached to the disbursement vouchers. This does not facilitate the assessment of actual work performed to determine compliance with the provisions of the contract.

	

4)		One of the institutional student programs and services provided by the University is Campus Ministry program. As provided in Item 3.6 of CapSU Student Handbook Revised 2016, the Campus Ministry offers ecumenical services such as monthly mass, baccalaureate mass, retreats and recollections, Bible studies and Bible sharing, and outreach programs. We observed that every campus/satellite college has its own faculty designated as campus ministry coordinator who also performs the functions (except for the conduct of mass/service) of the hired chaplain. 

	

The agency did not exercise prudence in the disbursement of public funds because the hiring of a University Chaplain through a contract of service proved to be disadvantageous to the government since the functions of the University Chaplain can also be performed by the campus ministry coordinator. The agency could have just hired a priest to provide ecumenical services as the need arises and thus incur savings rather than enter into a contract for the provision of such services for a duration of time. Moreover, the University Chaplain was not able to pursue his functions since there are no students during this pandemic, thus the relevance of his services is doubtful.  



Moreover, the 1987 Philippine Constitution, as the Supreme Law of the Land, provides the limitation known as the prohibition against appropriations for sectarian benefit, detailed as follows:



“No public money or property shall be appropriated, applied, paid or employed, directly or indirectly, for the use, benefit, or support of any sect, church, denomination, sectarian institution, or system of religion, or of any priest, preacher, minister, or other religious teacher, or dignitary, as such, except when such priest, preacher, minister, or dignitary is assigned to the armed forces, or to any penal institution, or government orphanage or leprosarium. (Sec. 29 (2), Art. VI)”

	

With the above noted deficiencies, the validity and propriety of hiring a University Chaplain under a contract of service and the corresponding payment of his services in the amount P240,000.00 for CY 2020 could not be ascertained.



We recommended that the Management: 



a)	Strictly comply with the provisions of Sec. 29(2), Article VI of the 1987 Constitution on the appropriation for sectarian benefit;

  

b)	Submit perfected contracts and each of all the documents forming part thereof by reference or incorporation to the Office of the Auditor within five working days for auditorial review and evaluation;



c)	Direct the Accountant to make  a certification that there are funds available before entering into any contract; and



d)	Submit accomplishment reports to facilitate determination of compliance with the contract provisions.



The Management agreed to comply with the recommendation pertaining to the submission of the perfected contracts to the Office of the Auditor within the reglementary period. Also, the Accountant will issue certification as to funds available before entering into any contract.



Meanwhile, the Management commented that the hiring of a University Chaplain was approved by virtue of a Board Resolution thru Referendum No. 24, series of 2019. They assert that the services of the Chaplain is to promote the well-being and spiritual needs of the students regardless of faith. According to the Management, the Chaplain continued to communicate with the students and still regularly went to the nine campuses/satellite colleges to take care of the spiritual needs of the faculty and staff despite the fact that there were no students present at the campuses due to the pandemic. Likewise, the activities prepared by the Chaplain as shown in his Programs and Accomplishment Report are for all regardless of the religious affiliations. As to the existing Campus Ministry, the Management stated that the Coordinators’ main function is to coordinate with the Chaplain and facilitate various activities conducted by partners and volunteers. Partners and volunteers coordinated to the University Chaplain and the Multi-Faith Coordinators on their monthly activities as approved by the school officials. Further, they claimed that the amount received monthly by the Chaplain is not a regular salary but a meal and gas allowances in going to the campuses. Meanwhile, the management is requesting for a reconsideration in allowing them to continue with the services of the University Chaplain as there has been a great improvement in terms of human relationship after the twelve-month service of the said Chaplain. 



Auditor’s Rejoinder 



We understand that spiritual guidance is important in the lives of many and most especially the students. However, appropriation for sectarian benefits are strictly prohibited as provided in Section 29(2), Article VI of the 1987 Constitution. 



The Audit Team maintains its stand that the hiring of a University Chaplain with a consideration in any form constitutes an irregular expenditures. 



Non-preparation of Property Inventory Form (PIF)

		

19)	Property Inventory Form (PIF) was not prepared contrary to COA Circular No. 2018-002 dated May 31, 2018, thus, the insurable properties and the completeness and adequacy of the existing insurance coverage could not be determined.



Republic Act (RA) No. 656, otherwise known as the Property Insurance Law, as amended by Presidential Decree (PD) No. 245, requires all government agencies to insure against any insurable risk their properties, assets and interests with General Insurance Fund (GIF), as administered by the Government Service Insurance System (GSIS).



Similarly, Item 5.0 of COA Circular No. 2018-002 provides for the specific guidelines on the insurance and bonding of risks on insurable government assets and properties with the GIF pursuant to RA No. 656, as amended, to wit:

 

5.1 Heads of government agencies shall direct the pertinent official under his/her supervision to prepare the Property Inventory Form (PIF) listing of all the insurable properties and other assets, showing their latest appraised values/valuation, appraisal date, location, and other information. The consolidated PIF will then be submitted to the Supervising Auditor/Audit Team Leader and the GIF, GSIS not later than April 30 of each year. The Head of the Agency is likewise directed to include in the agency annual budget the amount of premiums for the general insurance covering all insurable properties and other assets and ensure its payment to the GSIS.



5.3. The Head of Agency, Accountant, Property Officer, Accountable Officer (AO), Cashier, Treasurer, or any government official of the National Government Agencies/Local Government Units/ Government Owned and Controlled Corporations (GOCCs), who are responsible for the payment of the premiums prescribed, who refuses or habitually neglects to comply within the time prescribed, shall be held liable for the payment of said premiums and shall pay to GSIS a fine of two per centum (2%) per month of said premiums from their due dates until received by the GIF, as provide for under Section 6(b) of RA No. 656.



5.6. No appropriation authorized in the General Appropriations Act shall be available to pay the salary of any official or employee who violates the provisions of this circular, without prejudice to any disciplinary action that may be instituted against such official or employee.



Interview with the Supply Officers of Campuses/Satellite Colleges and verification of the supporting documents of various Property, Plant and Equipment of the University disclosed the following deficiencies:



1)			Property Inventory Form (PIF) was not prepared and submitted to the Office of the Auditor thus, the insurable properties and the completeness and adequacy of the existing insurance coverage could not be determined.



Section 5.1 (b) of COA Circular No. 2018-002 mandates the preparation of the Property Inventory Form (PIF) listing of all the insurable properties. 



Likewise, Section 5.1 (c) provides: “Extract from the Report on the Physical Count of Property, Plant and Equipment, as well as from the Report on the Physical Count of Inventories, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Government Accounting Manual, the data for the PIF pertaining to the insurable assets and interest of the government (excluding impaired properties for disposal).”



2)			Non-issuance of specific guidelines/instructions to the Campuses and Satellite Colleges by the Head of the agency to submit their respective accurate and updated PIF for consolidation.



Section 5.1 (g) of COA Circular No. 2018-002 states that “The Head of the agency shall issue specific guidelines/instructions to the R/DOs/Bs/OUs to submit their respective accurate and updated PIF for consolidation at the C/HO.”



3)			No appraisal of the insurable properties and other assets of the University was made.



Section 5.1 (d) of the same circular states that “Heads of government agencies shall direct the pertinent official under his/her supervision to cause the appraisal of the insurable properties and other assets of their respective offices. For this purpose, an in-house appraisal shall be sufficient if the property or insurable interest has a value of P10 million and below. Otherwise, an independent appraisal shall be necessary.”



To enable the GIF to deliver the mandated services, it is necessary for the GSIS to obtain complete information on the inventory of assets and properties of all government agencies, including the latest appraised/market values determined by a third party or in-house appraiser in compliance with the accounting and other valuation standards adopted by the concerned agency.



4)				Non-renewal of the property insurance of buildings by the Central Administration, Sigma Satellite College, Dumarao Satellite College, Poblacion Satellite College and Pilar Satellite College.



Upon verification, it was revealed that only the motor vehicles, one building in Roxas Main Campus, two buildings in Pontevedra, one building in Burias Campus, one building in Dayao Satellite College and one building in Tapaz Satellite College were covered with property insurance for the year 2020-2021. 



Meanwhile, the Supply/Property Officers of Central Administration, Sigma Satellite College, Dumarao Satellite College, Poblacion Satellite College and Pilar Satellite College admitted that they were not able to renew the property insurance of their buildings due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the implementation of Enhanced Community Quarantine from March until May 2020. Upon return to the office, the concerned personnel totally overlooked the said deadline.



Non-compliance with Republic Act (RA) No. 656, as amended, requiring all government agencies to insure against any insurable risk their properties, assets and interests with General Insurance Fund (GIF), denies the government adequate and reliable protection against any damage to or loss of its properties or assets and interests due to fire, earthquake, storm, or other fortuitous events/casualty. Further, it also deprives the GSIS of substantial premium income that should have formed part of the GIF.



We recommended and the Management agreed to: 



a)	Issue specific guidelines/instructions to the Campuses/Satellite Colleges to submit their respective accurate and updated PIF for consolidation;



b)	Direct the responsible person/s to conduct inventory and appraisal of key and high-risk properties to be considered as insurable assets and prepare Property Inventory Form (PIF);



c)	Require the pertinent official to submit the consolidated Property Inventory Form (PIF) to the Supervising Auditor/Audit Team Leader and the GIF, GSIS not later than April 30 of each year; and



d)	Direct the Supply/Property Officers to take appropriate action in applying for property insurance and its renewal with the GSIS, when warranted.



Non-maintenance of Index of Payments (IP)



20)	Non-preparation and maintenance of Index of Payments (IP) contrary to Appendix 38 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume II, hence, precluded the monitoring of payments to various creditors in order to prevent double payment on the same claim.



Appendix 38 of the GAM for NGAs, Volume II, provides that the Index of Payment (IP) shall be used by the Accounting Division or Unit to record or monitor payments made to each creditor or payee. It shall be maintained by fund cluster. Also, it provides that transactions shall be posted as they occur.



Verification of the compliance by the University with the aforementioned requirement revealed that the Central Administration Accounting Office maintains the Index of Payments (IP) of the five Satellite Colleges and the Central Administration however, these were not updated. While the IP of the other Campuses and Satellite College were not prepared and maintained by their respective Accounting Units. The purpose of the preparation of the IP is to assist the Accountant in determining whether or not the claim is in order so as to prevent double payment of the same claim.



Interview with the Accountants disclosed that they were not able to prepare and/or update the IP due to lack of manpower. However, they assured that they will assign the job to other personnel with lesser workload. Non preparation and maintenance of the IP precluded proper monitoring of payments to various creditors or payees and further resulted to a risk of double payment on the same claim.



We recommended and the Management agreed to direct the Accountants to prepare and maintain the Index of Payments of each creditor or payee pursuant to the provision set forth in the GAM for NGAs in order to prevent double payment on the same claim.











ORS/BURS not Properly Accomplished



21)	The Obligation Request Status (ORS) and Budget Utilization Request and Status (BURS) were not properly accomplished contrary to the prescribed format and instructions embodied in the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume II, hence, the recorded utilization of the budget allocation of the University could not be relied upon.



Volume II of the GAM for NGAs provides for the various formats of books of accounts, registries, records, forms and reports to be maintained by the government agencies, and the instructions on their use which include the Obligation Request Status (ORS) and Budget Utilization Request and Status (BURS) among others.



The Obligation Request Status (ORS) shall be used by the Requesting/ Originating Offices in the utilization of their approved budget allocations per General Appropriations Act Release Document (GAARD) and other budget laws/authority. Box C, Status of Obligation, of the ORS shall serve as the subsidiary ledger for obligations to be maintained by the Budget Division/Unit.  



Meanwhile, the Budget Utilization Request and Status (BURS) shall be used by the Requesting/ Originating Offices in the utilization of their approved budget allocations for off budgetary and custodial funds such as SAGF, Internally generated funds, Business related funds and Trust funds. Box C, Status of Utilization, of the BURS shall serve as the subsidiary ledger for budget utilizations to be maintained by the Budget Division/Unit.  



Audit of disbursements disclosed the following deficiencies, to wit:



1)	Status of Utilization or the Box C of the ORS and BURS were not duly accomplished by the Budget Division/Unit of every campus except for Burias Campus and Sigma Satellite College, hence, the balance of the obligation or utilization cannot be easily monitored and determined.  The concerned budget officers informed the audit team that they overlooked to fill in all the data in the Box C.  For Central Administration budget officer, this was due to lack of personnel to do the job.  However, the management assured the team to address the deficiency by assigning another personnel with lesser workload.



2)	Disbursements Vouchers under the Trust Receipts Fund (TRF) were not supported with BURS. It is pointed out that the BURS shall be used by the Requesting Offices in the utilization of their approved budget allocations for Trust Funds, among others, in accordance with the instructions in GAM Volume II. The concerned Requesting Office was not able to submit the BURS to the Office of the Budget Officer as well as the Line Item Budgets of projects implemented through fund transfer. According to the personnel concerned, the Requesting Office has maintained ledger and monitored the disbursement for every project based on the Line Item Budget. They thought that preparation of BURS is no longer necessary.  Consequently, the practice of non-preparation of the required BURS hinders the auditorial review of the Audit Team in determining the propriety of the charges in the budget of every projects.  



In view of the foregoing deficiencies, the recorded obligation/utilization of the allotment/approved budget allocation of the University could not be relied upon.

We recommended and the Management agreed to: 



a)	Ensure that the Obligation Request Status (ORS) and Budget Utilization Request and Status (BURS) shall be duly accomplished by the Budget Officers indicating therein all required information in accordance to the instructions embodied in the GAM for NGAs, Volume II; and 



b)	Direct the Requesting Office to prepare the BURS for every disbursement and submit the same to the Office of the Budget Officer for certification as to availability of budget and ensure proper utilization of the fund.  Likewise, furnish the Budget Officer with the Line Item Budgets of every project. 



Non-compliance to CSC Rules and Regulations on Leave and Compensatory Time-Off, and Leave Cards



22)	The filing and approval of application for leave and compensatory time-off, as well as proper deduction of tardiness and undertimes on the leave cards of the University personnel, were not in conformity with the Civil Service Commission’s (CSC) Omnibus Rules on Leave, and CSC and Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Joint Circular No. 2, series of 2004, as amended, thereby rendered the balances of the accumulated leave credits inaccurate and indicated a laxity in the internal controls on filing and approval of application for  leave.



Section 1 of the Omnibus Rules on Leave promulgated by the Civil Service Commission (CSC) provides the entitlement to leave privileges of appointive officials and employees of the government whether permanent, temporary or casual. Section 51 mandates that all applications for vacation leave of absence shall be submitted on the prescribed form five (5) days in advance of the effective date of such leave. Section 53 also provides that all applications for sick leave of absence shall be made on the prescribed form and shall be filed immediately upon employee’s return from such leave. 



In addition, in CSC Resolution No. 10-1358 dated July 6, 2010, the Commission resolves to promulgate the guidelines on Half Day Absence, stating that any officer or employee who is absent in the morning is considered to be tardy and is subject to provisions on Habitual Tardiness, while any officer or employee who is absent in the afternoon is considered to have incurred undertime, subject to provisions on Undertime.



In the case of Yadao-Guno, Carmelita P. (CSC Resolution No. 00-0970 dated April 17, 2000), CSC has ruled that “half-day absence is incurred when an officer or employee does not report for work either for the whole morning or the whole afternoon.”



On the other hand, Section 6 of CSC and DBM Joint Circular No. 2, series of 2004, as amended by CSC-DBM JC 2A, series of 2005, prescribing the guidelines on the availment of Compensatory Time-Off (CTO) in lieu of overtime pay, specifies that an office order authorizing the rendition of overtime approved by the agency head should first be secured, followed by the actual rendition of overtime services, and then a Certificate of Compensatory Overtime Credit (COC) be issued, before one can avail of the compensatory time off.







Verification of the sampled supporting documents in the payment of salaries (February and March 2020) revealed the following deficiencies, to wit:



1)	Several applications for leave were not dated (see Appendix T-1); 

2)	Numerous applications for leave did not indicate the specific type of leave applied for (see Appendix T-2); 

3)	Application for Sick Leave were filed in advance before the date of actual leave (see Appendix T-3) while some Applications for Sick Leave were not immediately filed after return from such (see Appendix T-4); 

4)	Applications for Vacation Leave were not filed five days in advance of the effective date of leave (see Appendix T-5); 

5)	Special Privilege Leave and blank application for leave were applied for half days (see Appendix T-6); 

6)	Campuses/Satellite Colleges did not issue Certificate of Compensatory Overtime Credit (COC) in lieu of overtime pay except for Pontevedra Campus and Sigma Satellite College; and

7)	Compensatory Time Off were availed without the necessary supporting documents, such as the office order approved by the agency head, the service/activity rendered and the issued Certificate of Compensatory Overtime Credit (COC) (see Appendix T-7).

Verification of the entries in the leave cards with the Daily Time Record (DTR) disclosed that tardiness and undertimes of some University personnel were not deducted in their respective leave cards, contrary to the regulation set by the CSC, thus, rendered the balances of the accumulated leave credits inaccurate.

Interview with various HR personnel disclosed that some of the applications for sick leave were filed prior to the date of leave due to scheduled appointment for medical examination. Meanwhile, late filing of sick leave applications was due to non-awareness of some personnel to file  the application for leave immediately upon return

Furthermore, non-issuance of a Certificate of Compensatory Overtime Credit (COC) in lieu of overtime pay was knowingly done, with the HR personnel assertion that they have their own records (separate from the regular leave cards), where they can monitor the overtime earned by the employees to which Compensatory Time Off is applied after the filing of Application for Leave.



The above practices rendered the accumulated balances of the Vacation and Sick Leaves in the Leave Cards of the employees unreliable. Therefore, commutation of leave credits whenever any official or employee retires, voluntarily resigns, or is allowed to resign or is separated from the service through no fault of his own, and other leave privileges such as monetization of leave credits, terminal leave pay, transfer of leave credits to new government agency, and other leave benefits provided by law are erroneous since the computation of leave balances is inaccurate. This also shows laxity in the internal controls implemented by the management in regulating the rules on leave as promulgated by CSC.









We recommended and the Management agreed to direct the Administrative Unit Head/ Designated HRMO per Campuses/Satellite Colleges to comply the Civil Service Commission’s Omnibus Rules on Leave and ensure that:



a)		Every leave of absence is properly supported with an approved and properly filled-in application for leave with specified type of leave;

	

b)		Application for sick leave be filed immediately upon employee’s return from such leave;



c)		Application for vacation leave are filed five days before the incurrence of leave, duly approved, and duly received by the HRMO;



d)		Certificate of Compensatory Overtime Credit (COC) be issued for authorized overtime in accordance with CSC and DBM Joint Circular No. 2 series of 2004, as amended;



e)		Availment of Compensatory Time Off  be supported with the proper documents as stated in CSC and DBM Joint Circular No. 2 series of 2004, as amended;



f)		Half-day absences such as Undertimes and Tardiness be charged to Vacation Leave and not be required to file an application for leave; and



g)		Tardiness and Undertimes be recorded upon receipt of Daily Time Records.  Also, prior years’ Tardiness and Undertimes be recorded and updated in the Leave Cards of Employees as soon as possible.

	

h)		Require the Internal Audit Unit to conduct an internal audit of all Leave Cards in all campuses. A work plan with corresponding timelines should be prepared for this purpose and a report to be submitted monthly to the Office of the Auditor for monitoring.



Tertiary Education Subsidy (TES)



23)	The balance of Due to NGAs for Commission on Higher Education -Tertiary Education Subsidy (CHED-TES) totalling P10.043 million is unreliable due to the absence of subsidiary records, improper accounting treatment of disbursement out of Inter-Agency Transferred Fund (IATF)  and incomplete fund utilization reports contrary to Section 111 of Presidential Decree No. 1445 and Section 63, Chapter 6, Volume I of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), thus, actual liabilities to Source Agency in the financial statements as of year-end could not be established. 



Presidential Decree (P.D.) No 1445 states that:

“Section 111. Keeping of Accounts.

(1) The accounts of an agency shall be kept in such detail as is necessary to meet the needs of the agency and at the same time be adequate to furnish the information needed by fiscal or control agencies of the government.”

Further, Section 63, Chapter 6, Volume I of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), provides:

“Sec. 63. Disbursement for Inter-Agency Transferred Funds (IATF). The following are the accounting policies for the transfer of funds:

Xxx.

e. A separate subsidiary record for each account shall be maintained by the IA whether or not a separate bank account is opened.

f. Within ten (10) days after the end of each month/end of the agreed period for the Project, the IA shall submit the RCI and the RCDisb to report the utilization of the funds. Only actual project expenses shall be reported. The reports shall be approved by the Head of the IA.  

Xxx.”

For Academic Year (AY) 2019-2020, Capiz State University received from CHED the amount of P103.064 million for the implementation of TES program of which the amount of P100.062 million was allocated to student beneficiaries who were identified from the Master List provided by CHED UniFAST and P3.001 million for the Administrative Cost. Details of allocation of fund and the corresponding number of student-beneficiary are shown in the table below.



Table 26. Tertiary Education Subsidy (TES) Allocation for AY 2019-2020

No of 

Student

Amount

No of 

Student

Amount 

Student Beneficiaries

2,551

51,020,000.00

2,452

49,040,000.00

100,062,452.00

3% Administrative Cost

1,530,600.00

1,471,200.00

3,001,800.00

Amount Received from CHED

52,550,600.00

50,511,200.00

103,064,252.00

Allocation

1st Semester

2nd Semester 

S.Y. 2019-2020

Total

Upon verification, we noted the following: 

a) Subsidiary Ledger for Due to NGAs-CHED TES account was not maintained by the Accounting Unit contrary to Section 111 of P.D. 1445.  The year-end balance of P10.043 million as shown in the financial statements was the actual cash balance of the fund and not the balance of Due to NGAs-CHED TES, thus the actual liability of the University to Source Agency-CHED could not be properly established. 

Interview with the Accountant revealed that the maintenance of Subsidiary Ledger for Due to NGAs-CHED TES account was inadvertently overlooked. Nevertheless, they were able to maintain Subsidiary Ledger for Cash in Bank-CHED TES account.

b) Improper accounting treatment of disbursement out of Inter-Agency Transferred Fund (IATF) resulted to understatement of Due to NGAs account. In recording of receipts of IATF, the liability account is recognized by crediting Due to NGAs account. However, it has been the practice of the University to record the subsequent disbursements by debiting the said account and not the appropriate expense account. 

The accounting guidelines prescribe that all disbursements from IATF shall be recorded in the appropriate classification of expenditures upon incurrence. The account Due to NGAs shall only be debited upon submission of liquidation reports to the SA for the expense portion of the amount disbursed from the fund.

c)  Submission of incomplete and inadequate fund utilization reports relating to Inter-Agency Transferred Funds, contrary to Section 63, Chapter 6, Volume I of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs).

Verification of documents and reports of the University disclosed that the Fund Utilization Reports (FUR) submitted to the Office of the Auditor were incomplete and inadequate as to the details of expenditures and liquidation of TES fund and administration cost. The Accounting Unit admitted that they mistakably neglected to prepare a comprehensive FUR showing the disbursements and liquidation of TES fund, as well as the itemization of administration costs. Fund Utilization Reports should provide adequate and accurate information to the source agency as well as to the Auditor of the implementing agency. With these, proper monitoring and evaluation of the disbursement of benefits and implementation of TES program could not be ensured. 

We recommended and the Management agreed to: 

1. Require the Accountant to:

1.a. Strictly comply with the guidelines in the GAM for NGAs in treating IATF to establish actual accountability to Source Agencies;

1.b. Prepare and maintain subsidiary ledgers/records to properly monitor the disposition of funds; 

1.c. Properly classify the accounts in accordance with the Chart of Accounts provided in the GAM for NGAs, Volume III; and

2. Direct the Project in-charge and the Accounting Department to prepare and review properly the Fund Utilization Reports to provide adequate and accurate information to the Source Agency and the Auditor of Implementing Agency. 



Gender and Development (GAD)

	  

24)	The University’s actual cost/expenditures reflected in the Gender and Development (GAD) Accomplishment Report (AR) were not properly supported with complete documentation, thus, the validity and propriety of the reported amount of P37.032 million could not be ascertained. Moreover, GAD AR submitted was not accompanied with supporting documents contrary to Item 10.4 of PCW-NEDA-DBM Joint Circular No. 2012-01. 



Item 10.0 of PCW-NEDA-DBM Joint Circular No. 2012-01 provides the guidelines in the preparation and submission of GAD Accomplishment Report which includes, among others:



“xxx

   10.4 The annual GAD AR shall be accompanied by the following: (1) brief summary of the reported program or project; (2) copies of reported policy issuances; (3) results of HGDG test; and (4) actions taken by the agency on the COA audit findings and recommendations, if any.”



Upon verification of the University’s compliance and implementation of GAD, we noted the following:



1)	The CY 2020 GPB was submitted to CHED Regional Office No. 6 through Gender Mainstreaming Monitoring System (GMMS) for review on September 3, 2019. However, as of this date, said GPB remained unendorsed and not approved by the Philippine Commission on Women (PCW), thus, the same was not submitted to the Office of the Auditor within the prescribed period.  However, the management was able to implement its GAD Plan despite the non-endorsement of it from the PCW.



2)	The University has a GPB of P28.500 million which is 4.78 percent only of total appropriation for CY 2020 of P596.699 million, while the report of accomplishment shows the actual expenditures of P37.032 million which is 129.94 percent of the GPB and 6.21 percent of the total appropriation. Details are presented in the following table and Appendix U-1 attached.

----media/image27.emf----

3)	Discrepancies enumerated below were noted in the validation of supporting documents submitted. (Details in Appendices attached)



--	No attendance sheets and program of activities were attached for every GAD activity. Only the list of participants with their corresponding amount of salary attribution were submitted. (Appendix U-2)

--	Total  annual basic salary for the year of GAD Focal Point System (GFPS) personnel totaling P12.279 million were attributed in full instead of prorating the salary to their actual time spent for GAD activities; (Appendix U-2); and 

--	Erroneous mathematical computation in GPB (Appendix U-1). Total GPB reported is P28.500 million while the correct computation is P27.830 million, hence a variance of P0.670 million. 



Consequently, the above stated deficiencies rendered the reported actual cost/expenditures unreliable. 



4)	GAD AR for CY 2020 was submitted to Commission on Higher Education (CHED) for review and after that for endorsement by the PCW. However, this was not duly endorsed by the PCW. Likewise, said GAD AR was not accompanied/supported with the following: (a) Brief summary of the reported program or project; (b) Copies of reported policy issuances; (c) Results of HGDG test; and (d) Actions taken by the agency on the COA audit findings and recommendations, if any, contrary to Section 10.4 of the said Joint Circular.



The GAD Director informed the Audit Team that the supporting documents such as the attendance sheets were in the custody of GAD focal person of every campus. Her office only consolidates the report. She likewise noted the discrepancies, such as the mathematical computation and prorating of salary attribution of GFPS personnel, and assured to correct the same. She submitted the GAD AR through the Gender Mainstreaming Monitoring System of PCW for review of CHED without the accompanying supporting documents.  According to her, the CHED and the PCW did not require the submission of said documents to them.



This is a reiteration of prior year’s (CY 2018 AAR) audit observations.



We recommended and the Management and the GAD Focal Point System agreed to:

	

a)		Submit all supporting documents and complete details of activities to substantiate/validate the amount reported in the GAD AR; 

	

b)		Ensure that in salary attribution of GAD Focal Point System personnel,  only the proportionate amount of their salary based on actual time spent for GAD activities are charged; and

	

c)		Strictly comply with the preparation of the accompanying documents required in the submission of GAD AR as provided in Item 10.4 of JC No. 2012-001.



Compliance with Tax Laws



----media/image28.emf----The University complied with the BIR tax laws, rules and regulations on the withholding and remittances of taxes. For CY 2020, the following were the taxes withheld and remitted, to wit:

	

		

	

	

	The balance as of December 31, 2020 of Due to BIR was remitted in January, 2021.

	

	

	

	

	Compliance with RA 8291, or the GSIS Act of 1997 on the Remittances of Compulsory Contributions 

	

	----media/image29.emf----For CY 2020, the following were the GSIS premiums and loans of employees deducted and remitted, to wit:

															

								

							

		The balance of Due to GSIS as of December 31, 2020 was remitted in January, 2021.

	Compliance with RA 9679, an Act to Further Strengthening the Home Development Mutual Fund, and For Other Purposes

	

	The following were the Pag-IBIG premiums and loans, and remittances for CY 2020 with an over remittance in the amount of P15,181.33 as of year-end due to erroneous posting. However, the amount was already adjusted in January 2021.

	

	----media/image30.emf----

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	Status of Suspensions, Disallowance and Charges 	

	

	----media/image31.emf----For CY 2020, no Notices of Suspensions, Disallowances and Charges were issued. Likewise, no settlement of disallowance was made. The balance of disallowance as of year-end is P1.012 million.



40









