EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



A. Introduction



Capiz State University (CapSU) became a university by virtue of Republic Act 9273, an Act converting the former Panay State Polytechnic College into a State University on March 21, 2004. 



The University is committed to provide advance knowledge and innovation; develop skills, talents and values; undertake relevant research, development and extension services; promote entrepreneurship and environmental consciousness; and enhance industry collaboration and linkages with partner agencies.



The Management System of CapSU is an ISO 9001-2015 certified.  It was assessed by AJA Registrars and originally registered on November 27, 2018 



The University’s governing body is the Board of Regents which is composed of the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) Commissioner as the Chairperson, the University President as Vice Chairperson, Chairperson of the Committee on Education, Arts and Culture of the Senate, Chairperson of the Committee on Higher and Technical Education, House of Representatives, Regional Directors of National Economic Development Authority (NEDA), Department of Science and Technology (DOST), and Department of Agriculture (DA), Presidents of the Federation of the University Student Council, Faculty Federation, Alumni Association and two prominent citizens as members (Appendix A).



Dr. Editha C. Alfon, SUC President III, is in her 2nd  term as President of the University.   There are four Vice Presidents namely: Dr. Wennie F Legario, the newly designated VP for Administration and Finance (replaced Dr. Nilo D. Delfin);  Dr. Susan O. Dangan, VP for Academic Affairs; Dr. Mary Ann B. Martelino, VP for External Affairs & Linkages; and Engr. Efren L. Linan, newly designated VP for Research, Development and Extension (replaced Dr. Lucy A. Beluso) (<a href="file:///E:\capsu.AAR.CY.2017\CAPSU.AAR.%202017.draft\New%20folder\Annex%20B-CapSU%20Organizational%20Chart.doc">Appendix B</a>).



Capiz State University has three campuses and six satellite colleges strategically located in the 1st and 2nd Districts of the Province of Capiz (<a href="file:///E:\capsu.AAR.CY.2017\CAPSU.AAR.%202017.draft\New%20folder\Annex%20C-List%20of%20campuses.doc">Appendix C</a>).  It has a total personnel complement of 1,227 (Appendix D).



B. Operational Highlights 



With the declaration of Public Health Emergency Due to COVID-19 Pandemic, the University started the opening of classes in October, 2020 for the first semester of AY 2020-2021 with a total enrollment of 17,652. For Academic Year (AY) 2019-2020, total enrollment of the University was 27,961, 14,529 for the 1st semester and 13,432 for the 2nd semester (Annex E1). Other notable accomplishments are shown in Annex E2-E4.



















C. Financial Highlights



		----media/image1.emf----

Moreover, the University collected a total revenue of P180.385 million from service and business income that was constituted as Internally Generated Fund (Special Trust Fund by virtue of RA 8292),  as well as from its income generating projects treated as Business Related Fund (Revolving Fund). Moreover, a total of P603.094 million was received as Subsidy from National Government. 



----media/image2.emf----Its assets, liabilities, accumulated surplus and sources and application of funds for CY 2020 with comparative figures in CY 2019 are presented as follows:



D. Scope of Audit



The audit covered the accounts and operations of Capiz State University Central Administration, its three campuses and six satellite colleges for the year-ended December 31, 2020.  The audit was conducted to: (a) Verify the level of assurance that may be placed on management’s assertions on the financial statements; (b) Recommend agency improvement opportunities; and (c) Determine the extent of implementation of prior years’ audit recommendations.





E. Independent Auditor’s Report on the Financial Statements



The Auditor rendered a qualified opinion on the fairness of presentation of the financial statements of Capiz State University for the year ended December 31, 2020 on the bases of the following, as discussed in Part II of this Annual Audit Report:



a)	The existence, accuracy and reliability of the Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) accounts of the University totaling P410.324 million as of year-end could not be established due to deficiencies in the recording and monitoring of said account, contrary to the pertinent provisions of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs); and



b)	Allowance for Impairment of Accounts Receivables totaling P69.239 million which remained uncollected were not recognized/recorded, thus, affecting the fair presentation of said accounts in the financial statements.



F. Significant Audit Observations and Recommendations



The following are the significant observations with the corresponding recommendations, other than the basis for rendering an audit opinion:



a)	Reconciling items of Cash-in-Bank Local Currency, Current Account (LCCA) totaling 164.009 million remained unadjusted in the books as of year-end contrary to Section 3.1.19 of COA Circular No. 92-125A dated March 4, 1992, and Section 6, Chapter 21 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume I, resulting to inaccurate balances of the Cash-in-Bank LCCA and other consequently affected accounts.



We recommended and the Management agreed to: (a) Require the Accountant to closely monitor the Cash-in-Bank accounts by securing copies of bank statements or snapshots as of month/year end to ensure that deposits downloaded by other agencies or any credit memos appearing in the bank statements are taken up and recorded in the books immediately; (b) Make a written query to the bank as to the source, nature and purpose of unsupported deposits and credit memos reflected in the Bank Statements; and (c) Verify and analyze the reconciling items and effect the necessary adjustments in the books.



b)	Land account totaling P59.835 million as of year-end is unreliable due to non-maintenance of Property Plant and Equipment Ledger Card (PPELC) and subsidiary records contrary to Sections 111(1) and 114(2) of Presidential Decree (P.D.) No. 1445 thus, the validity and accuracy of the said account in the financial statement could not be ascertained. Likewise, ownership to some of these lands are not secured by Original/Transfer Certificate of Title (OCT/TCT) in the name of the agency.  Thus, construction of buildings and improvements on lots not lawfully owned by the University could put the University’s interests in jeopardy.

We recommended and the Management agreed to: (a) Direct the Accountants to: (a.1) Exert efforts in identifying the details of the P59.835 million recorded balance of land account in the books and prepare a PPELC for every parcel of lot being identified; (a.2) Ensure that those parcels of land covered with title in the name of the school are properly accounted in the books of accounts; (b) Require the Director of Landholdings and Physical Resources to: (b.1) Hire the services of a Geodetic Engineer for the conduct of relocation survey of the land area occupied by the University to determine actual boundaries and location of the properties; and (b.2) Facilitate the documents necessary for the issuance of Certificate of Title for those parcels of land without any adverse claim or pending case in court.

c)	Outstanding Receivables from students-borrowers of Student Financial Assistance Program (StuFAP) and Student Assistance Fund for Education (SAFE) totaling P1.077 million were not monitored and promptly collected contrary to Section 6.1 of COA Circular No. 2016-005, thus, the probability of collecting the same could not be ascertained. Moreover, Other Receivables in the amount of P215,439.11 remained unaccounted for and not supported with details and ledgers contrary to Sections 111 and 114 of Presidential Decree (P.D) No. 1445, thus, rendered the balance reflected in the financial statements as of year-end unreliable. 



We recommended and the Management agreed to: (a) Direct the Accountants to send demand letters to the concerned student-grantees and their guarantors on collecting StuFAP and SAFE loans; (b) Direct the Accountant of Burias Campus to make the necessary adjustments to record the outstanding StuFAP Loans under the receivable account; and (c) Direct the Accountant of Pontevedra Campus to validate the existence of the unaccounted receivables and when appropriate, request for write off of pertinent receivables following the guidelines set forth in COA Circular No. 2016-005.



d)	Deficiencies were noted in the recording, monitoring and physical count of inventories of Roxas Main Campus totaling P0.650 million as of year-end contrary to pertinent provisions of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), thus, the accuracy and existence of inventory balances in the financial statements as of December 31, 2020 cannot be established.



We recommended and the Management agreed to: (a) Direct the Accountant to make the necessary adjustments to reflect the accurate balance of the inventory accounts; (b) Require the Supply Officer and the Accountant to perform reconciliation of the Report on the Physical Count of Inventories (RPCI) and Supplies Ledger Card (SLC) on a regular basis; and (c) Direct the Inventory Committee to include all supplies on stock and semi-expendable properties in the conduct of semestral physical count of inventory items and submit the RPCI to the Office of the Auditor not later than July 31 of the year and January 31 of the succeeding year.



e)	Unreleased commercial checks for various funds totaling P8.871 million were not adjusted and reverted back to the cash account at the end of the year, contrary to Section 56, Chapter 19 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs) Volume I, resulting in the understatement of Cash in Bank and corresponding Payable accounts by the same amount in the financial statements. 



We recommended and the Management agreed to direct the cashiers and the accountants to prepare the Schedule of Unreleased Checks and corresponding adjustments to be made as of year-end, respectively, in accordance with the provisions of GAM for NGAs Volume I.



f)	Validity, propriety and accuracy of expenses charged to petty cash fund in the total amount of P0.773 million could not be ascertained due to the deficiencies in the management, control and accounting of the fund, contrary to Sections 35 and 36, Chapter 6 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM)  for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume I. 



We recommended and the Management agreed to: (a) Direct the PCF Custodians to: (a.1) Ensure that PCF payments are duly supported with complete documentations; (a.2) Promptly monitor the balance of the PCF in order to enable the replenishment of such as soon as disbursements reach at least 75 percent; and (a.3) Submit to the Accounting Unit all unreplenished PCVs at the end of the year for recording in the books of accounts; (b) Direct the Accountants to evaluate the amount of PCF of each PCF Custodian to determine whether there is a need to increase, decrease or liquidate the fund; and (c) Direct the Accountant of Roxas Main, Pontevedra and Burias Campuses to record the disbursements out of the PCF in the appropriate expense accounts classification.



g)	Proper monitoring and accountability for properties acquired through Fund Transfers from other Government Agencies amounting to P4.136 million were not ensured, due to non-preparation of the required reports by the Supply Officer and the Accountant, contrary to Chapter 10, Volume I of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), thus, rendered the existence and completeness of these properties as of year-end unreliable. 



We recommended and the Management agreed to: (a) Observe strictly the guidelines on the acquisition of properties out of Fund Transfers in accordance with Sections 8(f), 11 and 17, Chapter 10, Volume I, of the GAM for NGAs so as to record these properties to their appropriate account for monitoring and accountability; (b) Direct the Supply Officer and the Accountant to prepare and maintain reports such as RPCPPE, PC, PPELC to account for these properties totaling P4.136 million. Such reports must contain information as to the ownership of the properties, as agreed by the Source Agency and the Implementing Agency in the Memorandum of Agreement, so that proper actions can be made by the management upon completion/termination of the project; and (c) Require the Supply Officer and the Accountant to reconcile their individual reports with the control accounts and verify and adjust immediately any discrepancies.



h)	Absence of detailed schedules and supporting documents  resulted to the difficulty in validating the Trust Liability account in the amount of P0.753 million  contrary to Sections 111 and 114 of Presidential Decree (P.D) No. 144 and the Government Accounting Manual (GAM), hence, the balance reflected in the financial statements as of year-end cannot be verified.  Likewise, erroneous charging of Property, Plant and Equipment accounts to Trust Liability in the amount of P0.690 million, resulted in the overstatement and understatement of the related accounts in the financial statements. 



We recommended and the Management agreed to require the concerned Accountants to: (a) Obtain the details and supporting documents of the unaccounted trust liabilities and strictly maintain a ledger for every account where necessary; (b) Secure the necessary documents such as Deed of Donation to support the various PPEs and Semi-expendable Equipment donated to the University; and (c) Prepare the necessary adjustments to reflect the accurate balance of the Trust Liabilities account

i)	Prior Years’ transactions totaling P3.809 million were paid from current year’s budget contrary to Section 119 of Presidential Decree (P.D.) No. 1445 and Section 6, Chapter 2 of the Government Accounting Manual for National Government Agencies Volume I, thus, rendered the validity and legality of the recorded transactions unreliable.

We recommended and the Management agreed to: (a) Direct the Budget Officer to ensure that only valid expenditures in the current year be obligated/utilized out of the current year’s allotment/approved budget; (b) Require the Accountant to: (b.1) Recognize liability/payable accounts only for those transactions which have valid obligations and have actual delivery of goods and services; and (b.2) Strictly comply with  the provision on Public Sector Accounting Standards (PPSAS)/International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) in accrual basis of accounting.



	G. Summary of Total Suspensions, Disallowances and Charges

	

For CY 2020, no Notices of Suspensions, Disallowances and Charges were issued. Likewise, no settlement was made during the year leaving a balance of P1.012 million as of year-end.

----media/image3.emf----















H. Status of Implementation of Prior Years’ Recommendations  



The status of implementation of prior years’ audit recommendations are shown below.

----media/image4.emf----



 

	





vi









