				

PART II - Observations and Recommendations





A)	Financial and Compliance Audit



Unreliable Cash-LCCA account balance

	

1.	In RO IV, a variance of P1,846,155.88 was noted between   Cash in Bank-Local Currency Current Account (CIB-LCCA) balance of P7,846,387.20 and the bank balance of P9,692,543.08 of which reconciling items could not be identified failure of the Accountant to prepare the Bank Reconciliation Statements (BRSs) for CY 2020. While in RO III, a variance of P14,024,919.17 was noted between the General Ledger and Subsidiary Ledger of CIB-LCCA.  



COA Circular No. 92-125A dated March 4, 1992 specifically requires the Accountant to prepare the BRS based on the bank statements from the bank and submit the same within 15 days after the end of the month to the Auditor concerned; and immediately after the items were properly analyzed and verified, prepare correcting/adjusting entries for discrepancies/errors or other reconciling items requiring corrections by the agency.



Section 74 of PD No. 1445 bestowed to the head of the agency the duty to see it that the reconciliation is made between the balance shown in the monthly reports of depositories (bank statements) and the balance found in the books of the agency.



Audit of CIB-LCCA in two Regional Offices disclosed the following discrepancy of related financial records which affect the reliability of the cash accounts balances of these offices as shown below:



	a)	RO IV



Particular

 Book Balance (P)

Bank Balance

Variance

CIB-LCCA

7,846,387.20

9,692,543.08

1,846,155.88





Records disclosed that there were no BRSs and bank statements for CY 2020 submitted to the Auditor’s Office to enable the Audit Team to verify the discrepancy amounting to P1,846,155.88.



Failure to prepare and submit the BRSs, affected the timely audit of the CIB-LCCA account balance. Also, discrepancies/errors and reconciling items could not be corrected and adjusted immediately in the books of accounts which renders the accuracy and reliability of the CIB-LCCA doubtful.  



Section 12, (b) Chapter 2 of the GAM, Volume I mentions the subsidiary ledgers as part of the books of accounts of National Government entities.  Appendix 6 of the GAM, Volume II further prescribes that SL shows details for each account in the General Ledger which is maintained per account and fund cluster by the Accounting Division. 



In RO III, verification showed that the SLs were not updated as of December 31, 2020 such that a difference of ₱14,024,919.17 was noted between the SL and GL of the CIB-LCCA. The latest entries in the SL are as follows:



	SL Regular Fund Current Account

	SL Balance  (₱)

	Latest Entry in the SL

	GL Balance  (₱)

	Difference

	(₱)

	LCCA-0082-1130-53

	-

	No entry

	2,339,840.40

	2,339,840.40

	LCCA-0082-1148-31

	9,298,670.65

	June, 2020

	12,178,106.88

	2,879,436.23

	LCCA-0082-1671-29

	85,639.94

	Oct. 16, 2019

	85,639.94

	-

	LCCA-0082-1112-04

	-

	No entry

	8,805,642.54

	8,805,642.54

	Grand Total

	9,384,310.59

	

	23,409,229.76

	14,024,919.17

	

	The correctness of the accounts appearing in the GL of P23,409,229.76 could not be fully ascertained and accounted since the amount presented was not supported by schedules due to the non-preparation/updating of the SL for CY 2020 with the ending balance of P9,384,310.59 thus, having a difference of P14,024,919.17. Updated SL balances are necessary to substantiate the balances appearing in the GL.

	

When interviewed, the Accountant informed that she was not able to update the SL of the Cash in Bank account due to the adoption of alternative work arrangement and other constraints brought about by the pandemic.  





						We recommended that Management strengthen its monitoring mechanism that the Accountants of ROs III and IV to regularly prepare and reconcile financial reports, journals and ledgers to support the validity and accuracy of the CIB-LCCA. 

 

The Accountant of RO IV commented that the non-preparation of BRSs for CY2020 was due to the delay of the release of bank statements and Skeletal Work Schedule due to COVID-19 Pandemic. She added that the bank reconciliation for CY2 020 were already started this 1st Quarter of CY2021 and on March 15, 2021 she submitted the bank reconciliation of CIB-LCCA showing that the discrepancy noted was due to the unrecorded deposits from proponents of the Field-Based Investigation/Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FBI-FPIC) without yet authority to deposit from the NCIP-RO IV. She also promised to submit the BRSs for CY 2021 after the completion of the bank reconciliation for CY 2020. 



Error in accounting for deposit of collection



2. 	In RO CAR, error in the accounting for the deposit of collection amounting to P230,000.00 understated the Cash in Bank-Local Currency Current Account (LCCA) account.



On December 16, 2020, the collecting officer acknowledged the receipt of P230,000.00 from the Apayao State College (ASC) for the refund of unutilized EAP scholarship allowance released thereto in 2018. We noted however that the collection was deposited to the Current Account maintained by the NCIP on December 29, 2020, instead of remitting the amount to the Bureau of Treasury.



The Collecting Officer explained that the remittance to the Bureau of Treasury was not accepted because the check payment from ASC was drawn in the name of the NCIP-CAR, alternatively, she deposited to the current account of the agency on December 29, 2021. As at audit date, the amount was not remitted to the BTr and remained in the LCCA of the NCIP CAR.



Review of the accounting journal entries however disclosed that the deposit was debited to the Cash-Treasury/Agency Deposit, Regular account, instead of Cash in Bank-Local Currency Current Account (LCCA). The Cash-Treasury/Agency Deposit, Regular account was subsequently closed to the Accumulated Surplus/Deficit. As a result of the incorrect entry, the Cash and Cash Equivalents presented in the Financial Statements were understated by P230,000.00.



We recommended that the Accountant of RO CAR prepares the necessary adjusting entries to correct cash account; and accordingly to remit the amount of P230,000.00 to the Bureau of Treasury.





Unliquidated and unsupported cash advances (CAs)



3. 	Cash advances granted in 11 Regional Offices totaling P19,090,948.62 remained unliquidated as of December 31, 2020, contrary to Section 89 of Presidential Decree (PD) No. 1445.



                 Section 89 of the PD provides that no cash advance shall be given unless for a legally authorized specific purpose. A cash advance shall be reported on and liquidated as soon as the purpose for which it was given has been served. No additional cash advance shall be allowed to any official or employee unless the previous cash advance given to him is first settled or a proper accounting thereof is made. 



 		   The unliquidated CAs pertained to those granted by the following ROs:



RO

Amount (P)

Nature of CAs 

II

174,537.86

Granted to various LGUs in Region II for the implementation of documentation of the Indigenous Peoples Political Structure under the Bottom-Up Budgeting (BUB) Program (CY 2016).

III

730,925.52

Unliquidated cash advances ranging from two months to over nine months for projects which have been completed.

IV

3,145,798.65

P1,640,541.97 (58%) were unliquidated due the non-liquidation of cash advances beyond the reglementary period. P1,505,256.68 (42%) of these unliquidated cash advances were only granted near year-end due to the late implementation of special activities and projects.

VI and VII

4,328,511.87

Advances to SDOs and Officers and Employees ranging from less than 30 days to over 1 year.

IX

2,378,181.18

Cash advances granted to SDOs and to Officers and Employees ranging from less than 30 days to over 1 year.

X

1,632,749.85

Various CAs aging one month to more than three years.

XI

1,463,837.11

52% of the balances were CAs granted to AOs without liquidation of the previous balances of same nature/purpose.

XII

1,618,375.95

CAs for travels and special purpose.

XIII

1,587,292.00

Advances to OEs and SDOs for various projects aging from three months to seventeen years.

CAR

656,535.04

1,374,203.59

Unliquidated CAs for various projects.

Liquidations not submitted for audit, casting doubts on the propriety and validity of the expenses charged to the CA.

Total

19,090,948.62



	

	It is noted that the dormant unliquidated balances in ROs VI and VII for the Advances to Special Disbursing Officers and Advances to Officers and Employees accounts amounting to P113,599.64 are still carried in the books of accounts and the financial statements, despite being dormant for more than 10 years, contrary to the provisions of COA Circular No. 2016-005 and affects the fair presentation of the Receivable accounts in the Statement of Financial Position. Further review disclosed that no subsidiary ledger was maintained for every accountable officer granted with CA.

	

	The audit team in RO CAR was not able to vouch the propriety and validity of expenses charged to cash advances aggregating to P1,376,241.54, due to non-submission of the December 2020 cash disbursement reports and liquidation report for audit. It is noted that liquidation reports were submitted to the Accountant for accounting and recording. Incomplete documentation and/or lacking support document(s) from responsible offices have however prevented the submission of reports to the audit team for audit.  

	

	We recommended that Management require the Regional Directors concerned to demand the immediate liquidation of all outstanding cash advances in their respective regions. Moreover, to implement accordingly the recommendations of their respective Auditors on the granting, implementation and liquidation of cash advances in the regions.  

	

Region

Management Comment

II

LGU Itbayat, Batanes had refunded the amount of P139,188.79 under Official Receipt No. CGYN 0457605 dated January 19, 2021, and the balance of P35,349.07 will be utilized for the completion of documentation on IPS Yapayao until April 2021 by LGU Sta. Praxedes, Cagayan. 



IX:





	The Regional Accountant justified during the exit conference on May 14, 2021 that the grant of Cash Advances to Special Disbursing Officers (SDO) in relation to project implementation was used as the mode of payment, since it has been considered as the most practical and viable way to disburse funds for payment of transportation allowances for IPs participants, meals in remote areas such that a single supplier would not allow credit transactions, and materials used for rituals such as live chicken (Pangasi) etc.

	

	The Management further justified that demand letters were already sent to the accountable officers. Directives were also given to the BAC personnel to strictly adhere with the guidelines stipulated in the RA 9184.  Finally, an instruction was given to the Accountant to request authority from COA to write-off cash advances to the deceased accountable officer and to the IP not employed with NCIP in accordance with the guidelines.	



 XI

During the exit conference, the Regional Director himself asked his staff the status of the previous courses of actions taken, as this finding is recurring every year. He then directs his staff, especially those with CA balances to immediately submit the liquidation reports, or the said balances shall be deducted from their salaries.



SLs for each AOs were submitted the day after the exit conference, though few deficiencies were noted, to be communicated to Management after the preparation of this report.

XII 



The management explained that demand letters were issued to the concerned accountable officers. As of December 31, 2020, an aggregate amount of P84,000.00 were partially settled through salary deductions pertaining to cash advances for prior years.  There was no additional cash advance granted to employees with outstanding cash advances. Demand letters will also be issued immediately to the previous employees with unliquidated cash advances, who were no longer in service due to retirement and dismissal, after determining the location of the said individuals.  

	Similarly, management commented that a request for write-off in favor of the late director Marino Icdang was requested but was returned since only a photocopy of the required documents was submitted instead of the PSA copy. They will also issue a letter request to the Regional Office of the Philippine Statistics Authority for the copy of the death certificate. 

 XIII:



Management commented that they had issued a Demand Letter and a Memorandum dated February 22 & 23, 2021, respectively, pertaining to the immediate settlement of cash advances and coordinated with the heirs of the deceased personnel to secure a copy of the NSO death certificate and submit the same to the accounting unit.





Unreliable Inventory Account



4. 	The balance of inventory accounts of RO V amounting to P819,614.34 as of year-end were misstated and some accounts misclassified due to a) non-submission of Delivery Receipts/ Report of Inspection and Acceptance and RSMI to the Accounting Section; b) non-reconciliation between the accounting and property records; and c) non-compliance with the 2019 RCA. 



GAM Volume 1, Chapter 8, Sec. 17 on Records, Forms and reports to be prepared and/or maintained states that “the Report on the Physical Count of Inventories (RPCI) shall be used to report the physical count of supplies by type of inventory as at a given date. It shows the balance of inventory items per card and per count as shortage/overage, if any. These include the semi-expendable property wherein the issue is covered by the ICS.”



The RPCI should be reconciled with the SLCs and (Stock Cards) SCs maintained by the Accounting Division/ Unit, and Property and/or Supply Division/ Unit, respectively. Any discrepancy shall be verified and/or adjusted accordingly.



Comparative review of the reported Inventory in the Statement of Financial Position with the balances in the RPCI disclosed net discrepancy of P73,225.73



Due to non-submission of the Report of Inspection and Acceptance/Delivery Receipts and the Report of Supplies and Materials Issued, the accounting unit did not take up the purchases and issuances, respectively.  Moreover, some of inventory account titles used by the Accounting differ with those used by the Property Section hence, the discrepancies noted in the inventory balances between the accounting and property records.  Also, some account titles used were not in accord with the Revised Chart of Accounts (updated 2019) circularized under COA Circular No. COA Circular No. 2020-001 - January 08, 2020.



Furthermore, the Supply Officer did not maintain stock cards for each inventory item contrary to the provisions of the GAM, Volume I.



As a result, some inventory account balances were misstated and some were misclassified.

We recommended that Management instruct the:



	a)	Supply Officer to submit DRs/RSMIs to the Accountant to update the SL/GL for any additions and issuances of inventory;



	b)	Supply Officer to maintain stock cards for each inventory item to keep track of the purchases and issuances;



	c)	Accountant and the Supply Officer to reconcile the balance between the subsidiary records, general ledger and inventory counts and adjust the discrepancies; and



	d)	Supply Officer and the Accountant to coordinate with each other to properly classify inventory items according to its type using the account titles in the 2019 Revised Chart of Accounts.





Doubtful receivables account balance



5.     The validity of the total Receivables balance amounting to P50,090,152.14 as at December 31, 2020 was doubtful due to the existence of long outstanding and dormant receivables from OUs, NGOs/POs, NGAs and other receivables aggregating P20,160,967.79 thus, affecting the fair presentation of the receivables accounts in the financial statements of CO and ROs III, IV V, IX and XIII under COA Circular No. 94-013 and COA Circular No. 2007-001.



COA Circular No. 94-013 dated December 13, 1994 was issued to provide the rules and regulations in the grant, utilization and liquidation of funds transferred to implementing agencies.  Section 5 thereof, states the duties and responsibilities of the source agency on the funds transferred to implementing agencies.



Section 5.3 of COA Circular No. 2007-001 dated October 25, 2007 also requires that the signing officials of the Government Organization (GO) to the MOA shall cause close monitoring and inspection of project implementation and verification of financial records and reports of the NGO/PO, and shall ensure compliance with the provisions of the MOA and of this Circular.



Analysis of the Receivables accounts of NCIP ROs revealed the following:



ROs

Deficiencies

Amount (P)

	CO

	Long outstanding receivables aging more than  years onwards.

9,196,694.84

	III

Dormant Other Receivables for 10 years. Failure to file the required request for write-off



76,090.17



IV

	Dormant unliquidated cash advances granted to deceased and former officers and employees of the agency

1,615,869.58

V

Fund transfer to Bicol University amounting to P300,000.00 remained unliquidated as of December 31, 2020

	300,000.00

IX

Receivables-Disallowances and Charges Account remained unsettled

	8,033,136.20

XIII

Educational Assistance Program (EAP) Fund that was due from OUs for more than eight years.

	939,177.00

     Total

	20,160,967.79



We recommended that the Management require the:



Region

Recommendation

Management Comment

CO

      Intensify its effort to locate the whereabouts of the former officers and employees with outstanding accountabilities to compel them to settle their accounts, otherwise consider request from COA for write-off of Other Receivables accounts in accordance with COA Circular No. 2016-005 dated December 19, 2016.



       Enforce payment of the receivables from the NCIP’s officers and employees by formulating a scheme to deduct the accountabilities from their salaries and from the other benefits for the newly retired officer

Management has exerted efforts to eliminate the long outstanding receivables and cash advance by issuing several demand letters to the AOs. We even requested for the write-off of the cash advances of AOs with demand letters issued thrice and the same were returned to the sender (NCIP) as shown in the attached demand letters. However, our request was returned by the COA Auditor during that time requesting for a Certificate of no residence in the barangay of the municipality/city of last known address. 



We requested a certificate from the barangays of the last known addresses of the AOs but the head of the barangays refused to issue a certification. 



In addition, most of the AOs from the defunct ONCC and OSCC has no address. The HRMD cannot provide their last known addresses. 



The accountability of one AO who has retired on February 16, 2021 will be deducted from her last salary or terminal leave benefits.



With regard to the funds transferred to the University of the Philippines Visayas, aside from issuing demand letters twice, we coordinated with the Regional Accountant of NCIP Region VI to assist us follow up the liquidation of the remaining funds but due to the current pandemic there is difficulty in contacting the person involved in the implementation of the projects as most of them are in a work from home arrangements.



     The unutilized advance payments to Procurement Services – Department of Budget and Management (PS-DBM) for the Government Fare Agreements, the said amount will be carried over this year. The amount should have been utilized last year if we are in a normal situation.

III

      Intensify its effort to locate the whereabouts of the former officers and employees with outstanding accountabilities to compel them to settle their accounts, otherwise consider request from COA for write-off of Other Receivables accounts in accordance with COA Circular No. 2016-005 dated December 19, 2016.



      Accountant and concerned personnel to immediately collate and submit documents for the timely preparation of the request for write-off and submit the same together with all necessary documents and proper justification to COA for its timely disposition

     The management agreed on the recommendations. The Agency Head instructed the Accountant to collate the necessary requirements and submit to the Audit Team for disposition.

IV

      Intensify its effort to locate the whereabouts of the former officers and employees with outstanding accountabilities to compel them to settle their accounts, otherwise consider request from COA for write-off of Other Receivables accounts in accordance with COA Circular No. 2016-005 dated December 19, 2016.

     The Accountant agreed with the recommendation and promised to make request to write-off the dormant balances this year.

V

    Responsible officer or personnel to inquire into the status of the fund transferred to the Bicol University and require to submit the necessary liquidation reports to account for its utilization

    Management informed us that a follow up letter was sent to the Bicol University to inquire into the status of the implementation of the project.

IX

    Responsible officer or personnel to intensify the settlement of disallowances, charges to all employees who are still in the service and to seek the approval of COA to pay disallowances on installment basis pursuant to COA Resolution No. 2015-031 dated August 20, 2015.



XIII

Concerned officials of NCIP Agusan del Sur and Surigao del Norte for the immediate liquidation and return of the unutilized amount of the long outstanding fund transfer. Moreover, determine factors that caused the delay in the submission of liquidation documents so that remedial measures can be instituted.

       Management stated in their reply that they made a follow-up to the concerned accountable officer regarding the compliance on the memorandum. They further stated that the accounting unit would retrieve the records of liquidation for reconciliation purposes with Provincial Office records. While during the exit conference conducted on March 16, 2021, management commented that NCIP Agusan del Sur Provincial Office has already submitted the liquidation but still in the reconciliation process with the accounting unit due to some errors in recording the transaction. Thus, only the NCIP Surigao del Norte remained unliquidated. Per verbal communication with the accountant in February, the accountable officer of NCIP SDN committed to coming to the regional office in March to reconcile the records with the accounting office. Still, as of to date, the said AO has not appeared yet in the regional office. Accordingly, management has already communicated with them up to the 5th tracer, and should the concerned AO still failed to liquidate; they are going to withhold the salary of the said AO.



Auditor’s Rejoinder

RO IX:

The management had already convened to address this AOM. It was decided that demand letters shall be issued to all concerned accountable officers who are still in the service to settle their accountability on installment basis pursuant to COA Resolution No. 2015-031.  

	

	On the other hand, letter request address to COA for the write-off of the deceased accountable officers will also be prepared to implement this audit recommendation.

	



Non-receipt of Financial Assistance



6.	The non-receipt of NCIP RO XIII financial assistance estimated at P14M from Taganito HPAL (THPAL) Nickel Corporation reckoned from Calendar Years 2014 to 2020 is not in adherence to the provisions of MOA executed between and among the Taganito Mining Corporation, THPAL, Mamanwa ICCs of Brgys. Taganito and Urbiztondo and NCIP, thereby depriving the agency of implementing more programs and projects utilizing the said fund to benefit Indigenous Peoples/Indigenous Cultural Communities in Caraga.



A MOA dated November 2009 was entered into by and between the Taganito Mining Corporation (TMC), Taganito HPAL Nickel Corporation (THPAL), Mamanwa Tribe, and the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples represented by the then Chairman of NCIP, recognizing the right of TMC-THPAL in constructing and operating a downstream nickel processing plant within the area of the Mineral Production Sharing Agreement (MPSA) of TMC and in exchange of that right, TMC-THPAL is obliged to provide additional benefits such as the implementation of community development projects and provision of financial assistance to the affected IPs of Surigao del Norte and the Office of the NCIP as stated in Article V, Item 5.6 of the MOA, to read as follows:



5.6 Financial Assistance. THPAL shall provide financial assistance to the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples, to be exclusively used for their Socio-Economic Projects for the Indigenous Peoples of Surigao del Norte, for the duration of the project, under the following schedule:



5.6.a Period. THPAL shall give the amount of TWO MILLION PESOS (P2,000,000.00) per year to the NCIP, starting from the Commencement Date and every year thereafter, until the termination or cessation of the Project.



5.6.b Payment. The payments specified in the above paragraph shall be made by THPAL to the Trust Account established by the NCIP.



	Based on the MOA, the Project will use nickel ore as feed to the plant and will produce a mixed nickel/cobalt sulfide product for the export market for an estimated period of thirty years.



 	The said financial assistance amounting to P2,000,000.00 annually was recognized as a trust fund by the NCIP RO XIII and maintained in the LBP Current Account Number 0362-1141-28 under the account name Mamanwa IP Royalty. The financial assistance from the THPAL is in addition to the one percent (1%) required royalty fee to the Indigenous Peoples (IPs). Likewise, it is separate and distinct from the financial assistance to be provided by THPAL to the concerned IPs under Article V, Item 5.1 of the November 2009 MOA.



	The provisions of Item 5.6 of the original MOA were subsequently amended and modified to benefit many ICCs/IPs in Caraga and support the delivery of services and implementation of all other programs of NCIP. The Addendum to the said MOA executed on September 16, 2016, and signed by the original parties provides that:



Financial Assistance - THPAL shall provide financial assistance to the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples to be used for their Socio-Economic Projects for all Mamanwa Indigenous Cultural Communities throughout Caraga Administrative Region, as well as all other plans and/or programs implemented by NCIP, including but not limited to the revitalization of their culture and traditions, conflict resolutions, tribal meetings/dialogues, rental and/or purchase of motor vehicle/s for field visits or community monitoring activities, rental and/or purchase of office equipment and supplies, payment of wages of personnel under contracts of service or job orders, and workshops or seminars that would directly or indirectly redound to the benefit of IPs/ICCs of the Mamanwa ICCs, throughout the duration of THPAL Project under the following schedule:



a)	Period. THPAL shall give the amount of TWO MILLION PESOS (P2,000,000.00) per year to the NCIP, starting from the Commencement Date and every year thereafter, until the termination or cessation of the Project.



b)	Payment. The payments specified in the above paragraph shall be made by THPAL to the Trust Account established by the NCIP.



THPAL, TMC and the Mamanwa ICCs of Taganito and Urbiztondo agree that NCIP shall have the sole discretion in the identification of such plans and programs and in the preparation of the Work and Financial Plan (WFP) for the utilization of said financial assistance, thereby dispensing the need for a prior approval thereof from all parties before the amount shall be downloaded to the trust account and be used for its intended purpose/s.



		The addendum further provides the creation of a Management Team composed of the representatives from NCIP, THPAL, Mamanwa ICC, and Caraga Conference for Peace and Development (CCPD) representing the CSOs.  Said Management Team shall be responsible for the evaluation and approval of project proposals. They shall open a Trust Account where all monies coming from the Financial Assistance of THPAL shall be deposited.

	

		Verification of records disclosed that NCIP RO XIII duly received the financial assistance from THPAL starting from CY 2009 up to CY 2013 only. The agency has ceased to receive the said financial assistance in CY 2014 after an Audit Observation Memoranda (AOM) was issued to management by the previous audit team relative to the operating/administrative expenses charged against the trust fund that cannot be directly attributed as expenses related to socio-economic projects that would benefit the affected IPs, thus, contrary to Item 5.6 of the November 2009 MOA.  

	

	Due to non-compliance of the audit recommendations embodied in the said AOM, that led to the issuance of Notice of Suspensions, which eventually matured into disallowances. The audit disallowances are currently under appeal by the agency's persons liable, pending a decision from the Commission on Audit's higher authorities.

	

	Despite the preceding MOA and its Addendum as well as the issuance of AOM No. 2019-004 (2018) dated February 22, 2019, on the non-receipt of NCIP financial assistance estimated at P10M covering the years from 2014 to 2018, records show that the agency continually failed to receive financial assistance covering the years 2019 up to 2020; thus, it has now accumulated to an estimated amount of P14,000,000.00. In fact, LBP Current Account No. 0362-1141-28, where the fund was previously deposited, was already closed in CY 2017. Aside from no official receipt issued for the years indicated recognizing receipt of the assistance, there was no latest trust fund account opened purposely for the financial assistance from THPAL.



	It can be recalled that the previous audit team received a letter reply dated July 8, 2019, on the subject AOM furnishing them a copy of the compliance report dated June 22, 2019, stating that coordination activities with the IP Communities and THPAL were conducted, resulting in the drafting of the Internal Rules and Procedure for the THPAL Financial Assistance Management Team. There was no mention of the status of receipt of the financial assistance for the Years 2014 to 2018; but rather, Management highlights their commitment to transparency in utilizing the said financial assistance from THPAL.



	There was no other document provided to the Audit Team regarding the status of release of the financial assistance, including the composition of the Management Team and its internal rules and the Work and Financial Plans duly signed by the signatories. Instead, management sought consideration from the current audit team, as stated in a letter dated December 11, 2020, of Atty. Leslie Mae F. Plaza, Office Caretaker/RHO, NCIP RO XIII, to eliminate the audit finding under AOM No. 2019-004 (2018) dated February 22, 2019, for the reason that the estimated amount of P10,000,000.00 representing financial assistance from THPAL was not deposited to the agency account thus, its accounting cannot be undertaken.



	Considering that no substantial compliance was made to the audit recommendations embodied in the subject AOM and the financial assistance which has now accumulated to an estimated amount of P14,000,000.00 was not yet officially receive from THPAL and properly accounted for as government funds, the audit observation and recommendations remained unimplemented; thus, we cannot drop the said audit finding or deem it as implemented.



	Section 4.b, Part IV of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 8371, or the Indigenous Peoples’ Rights Act (IPRA) of 1997, provides one of the powers and functions of the NCIP, which is to negotiate for funds and to accept grants, donations, gifts and/or properties in whatever form and from whatever source, local and international, subject for the approval of the President of the Philippines, for the benefit of the ICCs/IPs and administer the same in accordance with the terms thereof, or in the absence of any condition, in such manner consistent with the interest of the ICCs/IPs as well as existing laws.



	On the other hand, Section 63 of PD 1445 states that except as may otherwise be specifically provided by law or competent authority all moneys and property officially received by a public officer in any capacity or upon any occasion must be accounted for as government funds and government property. Government property shall be taken up in the books of the agency concerned at acquisition cost or an appraised value.



	Considering the scarcity of government resources, the annual financial assistance of P2,000,000.00 from THPAL as stipulated in the MOA; is of great help in delivering services and implementing more socio-economic projects and other programs to benefit the ICCs/IPs in Caraga. Thus, with the non-receipt of an estimated amount of P14,000,000.00 as financial assistances from THPAL reckoned from calendar years 2014 to 2020, the ICCs/IPs in the region were deprived of the benefits intended to them.



	This is a reiteration of previous audit finding which remained unimplemented at year-end.



	We recommended that the responsible official of RO XIII to follow-up the Taganito HPAL Nickel Corporation on the status of the release of the financial assistance as provided in the said MOA and its Addendum. Furthermore, once received, direct the Accountant to account receipt of the financial assistance as government funds pursuant to Section 63 of Presidential Decree 1445.	



Management Comment



	Management commented during the exit conference conducted on March 16, 2021, that they would inquire from the THPAL the status of the release of the financial assistance. They also mentioned the on-going revision of the MOA as the NCIP Chairperson wanted the funds for financial assistance from THPAL to directly deposit it to the account of the Indigenous Peoples for project implementation under Ancestral Domain Sustainable Development and Protection Plan (ADSDPP). Management assured that as soon as the revision of the MOA is finalized and approved, they will furnish the Audit Team with a copy of the said revision.





Unreliable Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) accounts balance 



7.	The reported year-end balance of PPE accounts totaling P139,708,692.87 could not be relied upon due to the following deficiencies of CO and ROs II, III, V, IX, XII and XIII: (a) un-updated PPE Ledger Cards (PPELC) and Stock Cards;  (b) Unreconciled Report on Physical Count of Property, Plant and Equipment (RPCPPE) and General Ledger; (c) non-issuance and/or renewal of Property Acknowledgment Receipt (PAR) on some issued PPEs to end-users; (d) absence of Property Sticker/Number on each newly acquired/purchased PPE; (e) PPEs found on station but were not included on the inventory list; (f) unserviceable PPEs of ROs V, VI/VII, XII and XIII amounting to P3,146,727.02 was not disposed contrary to relevant rules and regulations; and (g) PPE aggregating P596,794.00 identified as unserviceable were removed/dropped from the RPCPPE without basis. Moreover, there were NCIP officials and employees of CO with two or more laptops under its custody and one unit of Nikkon D3400 DSLR camera that was not surrendered/turned over to the Property Officer by the employee who retired from the service.



Some of the accounting policies provided in Volume I of the GAM on the PPE are as follows: 



--	Section 21 - The issuance of property to end-user shall be covered by PAR. The PAR shall be renewed at least every three years or every time there is change in accountability or custodianship of the property. 



--	Section 38 - The entity shall have a periodic physical count of PPE, which shall be done annually and presented on the RPCPPE as of December 31, of each year.  This shall be submitted to the Auditor concerned not later than January 31 of the following year.  Equipment found at station and losses discovered during the physical count shall be reported to the Accounting Division/Unit for proper accounting/recording.



--	Section 41 - Lost property and the related accumulated depreciation and impairment loss shall be derecognized in the books upon receipt of the Report of Lost, Stolen, Damaged, Destroyed Property (RLSDDP) supported by a Notice of Loss prepared and submitted by the Accountable Officer.  The loss shall be charged to account “Loss of Assets” at an amount equal to its carrying amount.



--	Section 42 - The Chief Accountant shall maintain the PPELC for each category of PPE including work and other animals, livestock, etc. The PPELC shall be kept to record promptly the acquisition, description, custody, estimated useful life, depreciation, impairment loss, disposal and other information about the asset. For check and balance, the Property and Supply Office/Unit shall likewise maintain PC for PPE in their custody to account for the receipt and disposition of the same. The balance per PC shall be reconciled with PPELC maintained by the Accounting Division/Unit. They shall also be reconciled with other property records like PAR.

Section 79 of PD No. 1445 states that “When government property has become unserviceable for any cause, or is no longer needed, it shall, upon application of the officer accountable therefore, be inspected by the head of the agency or his duly authorized representative in the presence of the auditor concerned and if found to be valueless or unsalable, it may be destroyed in their presence. If found to be valuable, it may be sold at public auction to the highest bidder.”

	

COA Circular No. 2012-003 dated October 29, 2012 updating the Guidelines for the Prevention and Disallowance of Irregular, Unnecessary, Excessive, Extravagant and Unconscionable Expenditures states that: 



Unnecessary Expenditures. The term pertains to expenditures which could not pass the test of prudence or the diligence of a good father of a family, thereby denoting non-responsiveness to the exigencies of the service. Unnecessary expenditures are those not supportive of the implementation of the objectives and mission of the agency relative to the nature of its operation. This would also include incurrence of expenditure not dictated by the demands of good government, and those the utility of which cannot be ascertained at a specific time. An expenditure that is not essential or that which can be dispensed with without loss or damage to property is considered unnecessary. The mission and thrusts of the agency incurring the expenditures must be considered in determining whether or not an expenditure is necessary.



Excessive Expenditures. The term ‘excessive expenditure’ signifies unreasonable expenses or expenses incurred at an immoderate quantity and exorbitant price. It also includes expenses which exceed what is usual or proper, as well as expenses which are unreasonably high and beyond just measure or amount. They also include expenses in excess of reasonable limits.



Section 101 of Presidential Decree No. 1445 provides among others  that every officer of any government agency whose duties permits or require the possession or custody of government property shall be accountable therefor and for the safekeeping thereof in conformity with law.



Likewise, Section 105 of  Presidential Decree No 1445 states that every officer accountable for government property shall be liable for its money value in case of improper use or misapplication thereof, xxx.  He shall likewise be liable for all losses, damages, or deterrioration occassioned by negligence in the keepng or use of the propery, whether or not it be at the time in his actual custody.



As at December 31, 2020, the consolidated carrying amount of the PPE accounts of the NCIP totaled P139,708,692.87, as shown below:



	Accounts

Amount (P)

Land and Land Improvements

	3,963,315.81

Building and Other Structures

17,469,487.49

Machinery and Equipment

96,990,777.90

Transportation Equipment

18,836,672.99

Furniture, Fixtures and Books

	1,931,994.66

Other Property, Plant and Equipment

516,444.02

	        Total

     139,708,692.87



Verification of the PPE accounts and examination of related records of the NCIP revealed the following deficiencies:



ROs

Deficiencies

Amount (P)

CO

	Twenty-three units of laptops with book value of P1,019,268.48 in the PPE and seventeen units of laptops under the Semi-Expendable Property amounting to P236,174.00 were issued to sixteen AOs with the corresponding PAR and ICS respectively 

1,019,268.48

236,174.00

II

One unit Nikkon D3400 DSLR Camera with Property Number R2-OE-2017-09-002 with a value of P22,000.00 was not surrendered/turned over to the Property Officer by the employee who retired from the service.

22,000.00 

III

	(a) PPELC and SC maintained by the Accountant and Supply Officer, respectively were not updated as of the count; 

	(b) accountability and control for the custody/use of PPE was not clearly established due to non-issuance and/or renewal of PAR on some issued PPEs to end-users; 

	(c) absence of Property Sticker/Number on each newly acquired/purchased PPE; and

	(d) there were also PPEs found on station but were not included on the inventory list

11,576,368.55

V

	The Other Infrastructure Assets account amounting to P1,179,716.00 was not included in the Report on the Physical Count of Property, Plant and Equipment (RPCPPE) as of December 31, 2020.

1,179,716.00

IX

	PPE identified as unserviceable were removed/dropped from the RPCPPE without basis since there was no disposal conducted yet.

596,794.00

XII

	Incomplete physical inventory of PPE and non-submission of RPCPPE

9,467,930.89

XIII

Unreconciled RPCPPE and General Ledger

1,301,698.09

Total

		25,399,950.01

	

	The above deficiencies casted doubt on the completeness, correctness and existence of the total reported PPE accounts balance of the agency.

	

	Moreover, unserviceable properties of the following ROs aggregating P3,146,727.02 were not yet disposed as of December 31, 2020: 



ROs

Amount (P)

Particulars

V

753,830.98

Includes two unserviceable vehicles costing P463,750.00 and Information and Communication Technology Equipment items aggregating P290,080.98 that were also unserviceable.

VI/VII

193,327.65

The Disposal Committee was not able to effect disposal thru donation of the unserviceable properties in CY 2020 as the intended recipient agency was used as a facility to house medical frontliners during the height of community quarantine.

XII

1,361,564.95

various PPE were included in the report of disposal but were not present or counted in the actual disposal conducted

XIII

838,003.44

Unserviceable and fully depreciated Property, Plant, and Equipment that were incorrectly recorded in the Other Assets account

Total

3,146,727.02





Failure to dispose such unserviceable properties exposed the assets to further deterioration and loss of their economic value, depriving the government of any income that could be derived therefrom. Furthermore, prolonged storage causes unnecessary space congestion, which could be utilized for other purposes.



We recommended that Management to require the:



Region

Recommendation

Management Comment

CO

      Property Officer (PO) to monitor the issuances of units prior to the issuances of new units to AOs in order to avoid multiple possession of units with same usage.



     AOs with more than one unit to return those excess units under its possession to the PO for proper recording and monitoring.



     Concerned Official to strictly adhere to the necessity of procuring those units under the semi-expendable to avoid duplication and wastage of government funds.

As an initial feedback, while there are two or more laptops assigned under the custody of one NCIP official or employee, the same are not exclusively used by them. It was also noted that some of the laptops are already considered unserviceable and are required to be returned to the Supply Section for inclusion to Inventory and Inspection Report of Unserviceable Property.



As for the excess and serviceable units, the General Service Division through the Supply Officer required the concerned officials and employees to return excess units that are still serviceable and issue them to other officials and employees who are in need of the same.



     We shall submit a copy of report upon completion of the inventory and documentation of the same.

II

      Responsible Official to require the retired employee, to return/surrender immediately the Nikkon D3400 DSL Camera otherwise, he will be liable to pay the corresponding amount of the equipment

      Management has already informed the concerned retired employee and he agreed to pay the corresponding  amount of the equipment instead of returning it.

III

     Inventory Committee to accomplish properly the prescribed Report on the Physical Count of PPE (Appendix 73 of GAM Vol. II). In the event that there is discrepancy between the RPCPPE and the PPELC, the Supply Officer and the Accountant should reconcile the differences noted to have a reliable Financial Statement.



Supply Officer to issue the necessary Property Acknowledgment Receipt (PAR) for those issued PPEs under the custody of the end-users as required by the regulation. Copies of the PARs should be kept on file, maintained, updated and provided for each recipient which will form part of the records as basis for their renewal every third year after issue under Appendix 71 of GAM NGAs Vol. II.



Supply Officer to issue Property Sticker/Number for newly acquired/purchased PPE in order to identify and trace the location of the said PPEs



Responsible Official to consider augmentation of personnel who can assist the Supply Officer, if needed, to improve the overall controls in the recording and monitoring of the Agency’s PPE.

     The management agreed with the audit recommendation. During the exit conference, the Supply Officer informed the Audit Team that as of December 31, 2020, the records between the PPELC and SC were reconciled.

V

      Property Officer to prepare the Inventory and Inspection Report for Unserviceable Property (IIRUP) and the Disposal Committee to immediately undertake disposal of said items to partially recover the cost and prevent further deterioration due to long storage after which, furnish a copy of the IIRUP to the Accountant for dropping from the books the cost of disposed PPE.



     Direct the Property Officer to include the other infrastructure assets in the RPCPPE to reconcile with the accounting records.

Management in its comment stated that they will adhere to our recommendations.  In this regard, Supply Officer prepared the IIRUP and furnished the Disposal Committee and the Accountant to enable them to undertake the disposal of the subject unserviceable PPEs within the 1st quarter of 2021 and eventually derecognize thereof from the books of accounts. 



      Management immediately complied with our recommendation and submitted a copy of the revised, reconciled RPCPPE as of December 31, 2020 indicating therein the other infrastructure assets.

VI/VII

     Property Officer to prepare the Inventory and Inspection Report for Unserviceable Property (IIRUP) and the Disposal Committee to immediately undertake disposal of said items to partially recover the cost and prevent further deterioration due to long storage after which, furnish a copy of the IIRUP to the Accountant for dropping from the books the cost of disposed PPE.

    Management has instructed the Disposal Committee to decide on the mode of disposal to be used. They have also pledged to dispose of the subject unserviceable properties within the year.

IX

     Responsible officer or personnel to strictly comply with the guidelines set forth in the Property and Supply Management Manual and GAM in treating unserviceable properties and restore recording of these properties on the RPCPPE until disposal of the same.

     Management justified that a directive was already given to the Current Supply Officer to restore the recording of these Unserviceable Properties in the RPCPPE in May 2021, and periodically coordinate with the Accountant to reconcile any other differences that may arise.

XII

     Inventory Committee to accomplish properly the prescribed Report on the Physical Count of PPE (Appendix 73 of GAM Vol. II). In the event that there is discrepancy between the RPCPPE and the PPELC, the Supply Officer and the Accountant should reconcile the differences noted to have a reliable Financial Statement.



     Property Officer to prepare the Inventory and Inspection Report for Unserviceable Property (IIRUP) and the Disposal Committee to immediately undertake disposal of said items to partially recover the cost and prevent further deterioration due to long storage after which, furnish a copy of the IIRUP to the Accountant for dropping from the books the cost of disposed PPE.



     Accountant to draw a JEV to record the disposal in the books of accounts upon receipt of the complete documents on disposal.



Responsible personnel or Officials o Strictly comply with the existing standards, rules and regulations.

     Management commented that the physical count of Property, Plant and Equipment is still on-going and the property officer will comply with all the audit recommendations. Moreover, the accountant will immediately record the disposal made upon receipt of complete documentation from the Property Officer.

XIII

     Property Officer to prepare the Inventory and Inspection Report for Unserviceable Property (IIRUP) and the Disposal Committee to immediately undertake disposal of said items to partially recover the cost and prevent further deterioration due to long storage after which, furnish a copy of the IIRUP to the Accountant for dropping from the books the cost of disposed PPE.



      Properly plan the schedule of the physical inventory-taking to allow ample time for reconciliation of records between the Property and Accounting Units. Moreover, require the Accountant and Supply Officer to regularly monitor and reconcile their records for proper check and balance and make the necessary adjustments on the discrepancies to reflect the correct balances of the PPE accounts; and



     Accountant to reconcile the unserviceable PPE recorded in the Other Assets account with the properties listed in the IIRUP and effect the necessary adjustment by drawing a JEV duly supported with supporting documents to derecognize the unserviceable properties pursuant to IPSAS 17.

The accountant commented during the virtual exit conference that she did not wait for the inventory report prepared by the supply officer as the physical count of PPE was not yet done at that time; otherwise, the year-end report would be submitted late; thus, the non-reconciliation. The accountant further stated that upon verification last week, there were various discrepancies noted in the RPCPPE; hence she advised the supply officer to prepare a revised report for them to reconcile their records. Likewise, the supply officer suggested conducting an inventory in CY 2021 during the month of October to give ample time in the reconciliation of records between the accounting and supply offices.



       During the virtual exit conference, the accountant commented that prior to the implementation of GAM, it had been the practice of the agency to lodge the unserviceable properties in the Other Asset account; hence, the amount of P838,003.44 is a cumulative balance recognized in the previous years. She is still in the process of tracing the balance in the IIRUP prepared during the previous years to reconcile the record and come up with a correct balance. She further added that the former accountant failed to turn-over the General Ledger of the Other Asset account, thus the difficulty in reconciling the account balance.





Failure to conduct a cost-benefit analysis prior to entering into a new Contract for Lease of Real Property



8.	NCIP RO XIII failed to conduct a cost-benefit analysis prior to entering into a new contract of lease for Regional Office as required under Annex H of 2016 Revised IRR of RA 9184, as amended. Moreover, the absence of documentary requirements renders the validity and regularity of the contract awarded and lease payments doubtful.



	Section 12 of the 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act (R.A.) 9184, the Government Procurement Reform Act, specifies the functions of the Bids and Awards Committee (BAC) among others, such as to determine the eligibility of prospective bidders, conduct the evaluation of bids, undertake post qualification proceedings, xxx. They shall be responsible for ensuring that the Procuring Entity abides by the standards set forth by the Act and this IRR.



	Further, Section 53.10 of 2016 Revised IRR of RA 9184 pertains to the Lease of Real Property and Venue for official use, subject to Annex “H” of this IRR. Section 9 of Annex H thereof provides the guidelines on Lease of Real Property and Venue which was amended by GPPB Resolution No. 06-2018 dated December 18, 2018, and requires:



d) Renewal of Contract of Lease of Real Property (New Provision) 



i)	Prior to the expiration of the lease contract, the end-user of the procuring entity must conduct a cost-benefit analysis of the lease. For instance, it must compare the rental rates charged by its lessor against other lessors in the area. It must also analyze whether entering into a new contract will be more expensive taking into consideration the cost of transfer and accessibility to the public. In assessing the existing lease, PEs are encouraged to consult relevant government agencies regarding any new policy or directive in the lease of real property. 



ii)	If the results of the CBA, conducted by the end-user, continue to favor the existing lessor, then the Head of the Procuring Entity (HoPE) may simply renew its lease contract. If it does not, then the PE should procure a new lease contract in accordance with Section 53.10 of the IRR of RA 9184 and this guideline. For efficiency and economy, during the effectivity of the contract, or upon its renewal, the PE may consider the expansion or reduction of the space provided by the existing lessor, provided that the leased premises can accommodate the space requirements of the PE in case of expansion, based on the need of the PE and the best way by which such need may be addressed and satisfied, subject to existing budgeting, accounting and auditing rules.



	While Appendix A of Annex H of the 2016 Revised IRR of R.A. 9184 prescribes the documents that the BAC shall require from suppliers, contractors, and consultants for Alternative Methods of Procurement.



	The Audit Team requested the Management to furnish us with a copy of the perfected contract pertaining to the procurement covering the lease of office space dated December 7, 2020, which we received only on February 1, 2021.



	A review of the contract disclosed that NCIP Caraga represented by Regional Director Atty. Marlon P. Bosantog entered into a new Contract of Lease of Real Property for Regional Office use with Samping Realty and Development Corporation, represented by Dr. Albert S. Ong as the lessor. There was no date indicated in the contract signing, and further, no witnesses showed thereof. The contract was notarized on September 1, 2020. The new office space has a total floor area of 240 sq.m. at a monthly gross rate of P115,584.00, or a total of P1,387,008.00 for one (1) year period commencing on October 1, 2020, and will expire on October 1, 2021



	Further review showed that compliance with the pertinent provisions of R.A. 9184 and its 2016 revised IRR could not be readily evaluated considering that the lease contract furnished to the audit team was not supported with complete documentation. Hence, it could not be established whether or not Management has strictly observed the applicable provisions in Section 9 on the Lease of Real Property and Venue under Annex H of Revised IRR of R.A. 9184, as amended by GPPB Resolution No. 06-2018.



	Although the above provision as amended by GPPB Resolution No. 06-2018 dated December 18, 2018, pertains to Renewal of Contract of Lease of Real Property, it was emphasized in the said provision that the conduct of cost-benefit analysis will somehow help analyze whether entering into a new contract will be more expensive taking into consideration the cost of transfer and accessibility to the public, thus the need.



	Likewise, the documentary requirements such as the Mayor’s/business permit, PhilGEPS registration, and income/business tax return pursuant to Appendix A of Annex H of the 2016 Revised IRR of R.A. 9184 were not submitted, which consequently hindered the audit team in determining the eligibility of the lessor.



	The non-compliance of NCIP Caraga, particularly the BAC, with the pertinent provisions in RA 9184 and its 2016 Revised IRR rendered the validity and regularity of the lease contract awarded and lease payments made to the new lessor doubtful. Moreover, the failure to conduct a cost-benefit analysis of the lease deprived Management of the necessary information as a basis in decision-making on whether or not entering into a new contract of lease is favorable to the interest of the government.



	We recommend that Management of RO XIII, through the BAC to:



a.	strictly complies with the provisions in RA 9184 applicable to procurement activities of RO XIII;



b.	observes the guidelines on Lease of Real Property and Venue under Annex H of the 2016 Revised IRR of R.A. 9184 as amended by GPPB Resolution No. 06-2018. Henceforth, prior to the renewal or entering into a new contract, conduct a cost-benefit analysis to ensure that the lease is most advantageous to the government; and



c.	submits to the Audit Team the documentary requirements to establish the eligibility of the new lessor.



Management Comment



Management admitted during the conduct of the exit conference that they are not aware of the need for the conduct of cost-benefit analysis prior to entering into a new Contract of Lease. They further commented that they were just following orders from the head of agency, who ordered them to immediately transfer to another location owing to the health hazard issue as they often inhaled the foul smell of the garbage coming from the dialysis center adjacent to the office space of the building they were occupying. They further stated that since they are already aware of the need for cost-benefit analysis, they assured that it would not recur in the future.





Payment of Transportation Allowance (TA) and Use of Government Vehicles



9.	Some officers of NCIP RO XII who are regularly availing the services of the agency’s vehicles were also receiving the transportation allowance in full, totaling P118,000.00 as of December 31, 2020, contrary to the General Provisions of General Appropriations Act, thus, overstating the expense account and understating the corresponding income account.  



The General Provisions of the General Appropriations Act (GAA), provided restriction on the grant of transportation allowance. The restriction was repeatedly provided in the yearly GAA released by the government. Section 54 of R.A. 11465 or the FY 2020 GAA provides that “Transportation allowance, whether in full or partial amounts, shall not be granted to officials who are assigned or actually using government motor transportation.  Officials who are assigned government motor transportation, but are not able to use said vehicle for justifiable reason, as determined by the DBM, may be granted transportation allowance during the said period.”



Items 5.2.3 and 7.2 of National Budget Circular No. 548 dated May 15, 2013, provides the following guidelines:



5.2.3 The TA shall not be granted to officials/employees who are assigned or presently use government motor transportation.



7.2.	For incumbents who are assigned or who use government motor transportation



7.2.1 Those who are assigned or who use government motor transportation shall no longer be entitled to the TA, but only to the commutable RA for the month.

 

7.2.2 The grant of RA shall be based on the number of days of actual work performance on workdays by the official concerned. 



7.2.3 In exceptional cases when an incumbent is prevented from the use of a government motor transportation for 3 days or more, such as when the motor vehicle undergoes repair and a replacement vehicle is not provided, the grant of TA may be allowed, pro-rated based on the number of days of actual work performance on workdays without an official vehicle



The NCIP 12 has eight (8) positions authorized to receive transportation allowance (TA). The TA rates are shown below:



Position

No. of Position

Monthly Rate of Transportation Allowance (P)

Regional Director

1

9,000.00

Regional Hearing Officer (RHO)

1

5,000.00

Division Chief/Chief AO

2

5,000.00

Provincial Officer/ OIC-PO

4

5,000.00

Total 

8

24,000.00



The following are the agency’s vehicles and the corresponding officials who acknowledged the receipt of the vehicle or who are using the vehicle.



Unit

Description

Property Number

PAR By/Remarks

1

Nissan NAVARA Pick-up truck 4x2 6MT, 2019 model, Motor # YD25806844T, Chassis, MNTCC2D23ZOO49072, Plate # MV FILE 1501-189002

MTR-VEH-REG-0005

Atty. Michael M. Mamukid on September 1, 2020 (Previously PAR by Jeanne Anne Zoilo) 

1

REVO Sports Runner Model 2000, GLX 1.8 EFI, Plate # SGG-443

MTR-VEH-REG-0001

Teresa A. Somorostro (Previously PAR by Eric M. Raz)

1

Mitsubishi Adventure GLX Wagon Color Blue CSC 199

MTR-VEH-REG-0003

Joey L. Bogay (PAR was previously received but the renewal of PAR is not yet  received/acknowledged but he is using the vehicle)

1

Mitsubishi L200 Model 1998 pick-up, Plate # SGG-454, Engine #4D56AF5136, Chassis # K14TJUNSL-1342, Gray color

MV-RO-002

Teresa A. Somorostro / For repair

1

Honda XRM125 Dual sports, KPY00028357, color riverside blue

MV-RO-004

Lemuel C. Abida

	

Post-audit of the disbursements showed that some officials with issued government vehicles or using the government vehicles claimed Transportation Allowance (TA) in full, as shown below.



Period (CY 2020)

Michael M. Mamukid

Joey L. Bogay

Teresa A. Somorostro



Remarks



Amount (P)

Amount (P)

Amount (P)



January

-

5,000.00

5,000.00

No issued gov’t vehicle for RD Mamukid/Gov’t vehicle was used by the previous RD

February 

-

5,000.00

5,000.00

No issued gov’t vehicle for RD Mamukid/Gov’t vehicle was used by the previous RD

March

-

5,000.00

5,000.00

No issued gov’t vehicle for RD Mamukid/Gov’t vehicle was used by the previous RD

April

-

5,000.00

5,000.00

No issued gov’t vehicle for RD Mamukid/Gov’t vehicle was used by the previous RD

May

-

5,000.00

5,000.00

No issued gov’t vehicle for RD Mamukid/Gov’t vehicle was used by the previous RD

June

-

5,000.00

5,000.00

No issued gov’t vehicle for RD Mamukid/Gov’t vehicle was used by the previous RD

July

-

5,000.00

5,000.00

No issued gov’t vehicle for RD Mamukid/Gov’t vehicle was used by the previous RD

August

-

5,000.00

5,000.00

No issued gov’t vehicle for RD Mamukid/Gov’t vehicle was used by the previous RD

September

9,000.00

5,000.00

5,000.00



October

9,000.00

5,000.00

5,000.00



November

-

-

-



December

-

-

-



Total

18,000.00

50,000.00

50,000.00



Grand Total

118,000.00



	

Review of the trip tickets in support of the claims for gasoline expenses showed that some officials regularly used agency/government vehicles and yet claimed the full TA accorded to the respective positions.  A concerned official is being fetched from the respective residence to the office using the agency vehicle and subsequently brought back to the residence using the same vehicle.



Another official has been using another government vehicle for almost all of his transactions and yet he is still receiving his transportation allowance in full. He is using the government vehicle from residence going to the regional office or to the provincial offices and using the same government vehicle in going back to the residence. 



This practices are contrary to Section 54 of R.A. 11465 or the FY 2020 GAA and Items 5.2.3 and 7.2 of National Budget Circular No. 548 dated May 15, 2013.

	

	This observation was already brought to the attention of the regional accountant and said that she will raise the issue to the concerned officials. 

	

	We recommended that the Management of RO XII TO strictly observe the following:



a.	 concerned officials regularly using agency vehicle, waive the transportation allowance and immediately refund the TA previously receive;



b.	officials irregularly using agency vehicle, comply with Item 2.3 of COA Circular No. 2000-005 dated October 4, 2000 which states that “Whenever an official or employee entitled to transportation allowance uses the government vehicle issued to his office, a corresponding proportionate reduction on his transportation allowance shall be made”; and



c.  require the regional accountant to determine the total amount to be refunded subject to the verification of COA.



Management Comment:



Management justified that the withholding of transportation allowance was already implemented. Moreover, the use of vehicles was all official in nature since the activities conducted using the vehicles were all office related.

	

	As a rejoinder, we acknowledged Management implementation of the audit recommendation starting November 2020. However, transportation allowance granted to officials with assigned or using government vehicles shall not be allowed as it is always emphasized and repeatedly provided in the yearly GAA released by the government that “Transportation allowance, whether in full or partial amounts, shall not be granted to officials who are assigned or actually using government motor transportation.  Officials who are assigned government motor transportation, but are not able to use said vehicle for justifiable reason, as determined by the DBM, may be granted transportation allowance during the said period.” 

	



Incomplete supporting documents 



10.	Management failed to implement its control over the recording and monitoring of incomplete supporting documents for the duly approved payroll of NCIP CO contrary to the government documentary requirement.



COA Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012, Prescribing the Revised Guidelines and Documentary Requirements for Common Government Transactions.



Chapter 2, Section 5(f) of the GAM Volume I states that claims against government fund shall be supported with complete documentation.



Chapter 6, Section 8 of the GAM, Volume I provides that checks can be drawn only on duly approved DVs or Payroll.



The signing and completion of supporting documents before the checks were processed and drawn is a form of control. Signing of checks without completing the supporting documents defeat its control purposes of ensuring that a claim is approved and valid before it was processed and checks were drawn.



It was noted also that the Chief Administrative Officer of Human Resource Management Division (HRMD) was issuing certification of completeness of supporting documents as attachment in the DVs which contrary to its control on the recording and monitoring of attendance and corresponding documents such as (Locator slip with certificate of appearance, Travel Order/Itinerary of Travel, Approved Application of Leave, Office Order re: attendance to office activities) shall be attached by the concerned personnel to the DTRs on the dates/time where there are no entries to avoid automatic deductions from leaves or salaries.





We recommended that Management require the:



a)	concerned Accounting and HRMD Personnel of NCIP-CO to strictly observe the documentary requirements;



b)	concerned Accounting and HRMD Personnel of NCIP CO to exclude or separate the payroll of those employees with incomplete documents; and



c)	HRMD Personnel of NCIP-CO to strategically impose penalties or reprimand those erring employees who cannot accomplish/complete the required documents on deadlines.



Management comment:



Progressively, management assures the COA that compliance to the requirements shall be strictly observed and employees who fail to submit the required documents will be met with penalties in accordance to the existing rules and regulations.





11.	Disbursements of ROs CAR, III, IV and VI/VII aggregating P18,057,341.24 were not supported with sufficient/complete supporting documents contrary to PD No. 1445 and Section 15, Chapter 2 of the GAM, Volume I, thus, the legality/validity of the expenses could not be ascertained.



Presidential Decree No. 1445 or the Government Auditing Code of the Philippines requires that claims against government funds shall be supported with complete documentation. 



Section 15, Chapter 2 of the GAM, Volume I prescribes that “the Financial Statements shall present fairly the position, financial performance and cash flows of an entity. Fair presentation requires the faithful representation of the effects of transactions, other events, and conditions in accordance with the definitions and recognition criteria for assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses set out in the Philippine Public Sector Accounting Standards (PPSAS).”



Verification of the agency disbursements revealed the following deficiencies:



ROs

Amount (P)

Deficiencies

CAR

16,249,152.76

159 DVs were not submitted for audit due to incomplete supporting documents.

III

145,301.64

DVs related to Covid19 funds were inadequately supported with List of Recipients of the delivered items to actual beneficiaries related to Covid19 activities.

IV

142,500.00

Funds released to cover the emergency assistance to the victims of Typhoons Rolly and Ulysses were not supported with complete documentation. The distribution to the end-user were not showed by attaching Fund Utilization Report, Report of Accomplishment, pictures of the implementation of distribution, and list of beneficiaries with their signatures signifying their acceptance of the rice.

VI/VII

1,520,386.84

Disbursements of the agency for salaries and wages of regular employees submitted for audit were without sufficient or complete supporting documents. The DTRs and Approved Applications for Leave to support the payrolls were not submitted to the Office of the Auditor

Total

18,057,341.24





Due to the incomplete supporting documents submitted, the propriety, validity and regularity of the transactions cannot be fully established. 











We recommended that Management require the: 



Region

Recommendation

Management Comment

CAR

      Ensure that all disbursements are duly supported with the required documentary requirements as prescribed in COA Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012, and immediate submission of the same to the Audit Team and;



      Responsible official to Review further the Office’s project management and financial processes, to identify possible improvement opportunities that would address the recurring delays in submission of disbursement vouchers due to the incomplete documentation and delayed submission of claims for project and programmatic activity expenses.

Management in their reply to the audit observation memorandum commented that one of the causes for the delay in submitting DVs is the key signatory officers were on extended quarantine due to exposure to COVID positive individuals. If possible, e-signatures on documents be allowed on supporting documents in lieu of the original signatures in accordance with the E-Commerce law, however, responsible officials will initial the e-signatures for accountability and in order not to delay submission of documents to COA.



The Audit Team agree on adopting e-signatures to facilitate processing of transactions during this pandemic and with the adoption of alternative working arrangement in government offices. The Office however, to issue its internal guidelines to set the conditions and limitations of using e-signature.



       Additional 97 DVs amounting P3,954,665.81 was submitted on March 10 and 11, 2021. The partial submission was received and inventoried to be subject for post-audit.

III

      Ensure that all disbursements are duly supported with the required documentary requirements as prescribed in COA Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012, and immediate submission of the same to the Audit Team.

     The management commented and agreed on the audit recommendation. The Agency Head instructed the Bookkeeper/Accountant to ensure adequate supporting documents were attached to the Disbursement Vouchers before processing and payment.

IV

      Ensure that all disbursements are duly supported with the required documentary requirements as prescribed in COA Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012, and immediate submission of the same to the Audit Team and;



     Regional Director to instruct the project/program implementers to support the disbursed funds with complete documentation such as Fund Utilization Report, Report of Accomplishment, pictures of the implementation of distribution or implementation of projects/program, and list of beneficiaries with their signatures signifying their acceptance of the project/funds/goods/services received, aside from the attached canvass and official receipts

     The Management assured the Audit Team that the emergency assistance in the form of rice were distributed and promised to support the same with complete documentation and submit to the Auditor’s Office after the gathering of the necessary documents.

VI/VII

       Ensure that all disbursements are duly supported with the required documentary requirements as prescribed in COA Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012, and immediate submission of the same to the Audit Team.

      During the exit conference, Management committed to submit the required supporting documents for the disbursements pertaining to their salaries and wages. Proper controls were also discussed to ensure that attendance data are accurate and retrievable.





Unreliable balance of the Salaries and Wages – Regular and PERA expense accounts



12.	The reported year-end balance of salaries and wages – regular and PERA of NCIP-CO amounting to P74,993,138.94 and P2,733,723.73 respectively could not be relied upon due to un-submitted supporting documents.



Section 15, Chapter 2, Volume I of the GAM provides that the FSs shall present fairly the financial position, financial performance and cash flow of an entity. Fair presentation requires the faithful representation of the effects of transactions, other events, and conditions in accordance with definitions and recognition criteria for assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses set out in the PPSASs.



Below table is the summary of the monthly Payroll Liquidations with corresponding amount which are not yet submitted to the Audit Team.





Month



Salaries and Wages-Regular 

(P)



Personnel Economic Relief Allowance

 (P)



Payroll DVs No.

March

5,263,358.00

194,000.00

20-03-0214

April

606,282.00

-

20-04-0318



2,207,386.00

208,000.00

20-04-0320

May

6,253,158.00

222,000.00

20-05-0383

June 

5,946,303.00

216,000.00

20-06-0464

July 

5,982,751.01

216,000.00

20-07-0525

August

6,040,788.00

218,000.00

20-08-0608

September 

6,031,510.00

216,000.00

20-09-0691



3,800,000.00

-

20-09-0772

October

2,235,842.00

214,000.00

20-10-0832

November

6,042,846.44

214,000.00

20-11-0892

December

5,996,775.00

216,000.00

20-12-1042

Total

56,407,545.45

2,134,000.00





Based on the above table it shows that 75 percent of the total salaries and 78 percent of the total PERA cannot be verified as to the completeness and validity of the transactions reported. It cast doubt as to the reliability of the reported expenses in the presentation of the Financial Statement. 







We recommended that Management require the:



a)	Concerned Accounting and HMRD Personnel of NCIP-CO to immediately submit the payroll liquidations to the Audit Team; and



b)	NCIP-CO’s Accounting Division not to process Payroll DVs without the complete supporting documents.





Unreliable payables



13.	The agency’s payables accounts were unreliable due to: (a) inter- agency payable of RO III amounting to P1,085,662.21   could not be ascertained due to lack of supporting documents and the accounts have been dormant for more than five years; (b) Financial Liabilities account balance of RO CAR amounting to P1,035,475.40, included payables amounting to P257,657.38 that no longer represent valid claims; and (c) NCIP-CO’s payable amounting to P3,910.00 remains outstanding for two years or more.



Executive Order (EO) No. 87 directed that all accounts payable which remains outstanding for two years or more in the books of NGAs be reverted to the accumulated surplus or deficit of the general fund, or the cumulative results of operations of the national government.



Likewise, RA No. 3526, entitled “An Act Authorizing the Reversion of Unliquidated Balances of Accounts Payable Outstanding for Two Years or More” and PD No. 1445 (s. 1978) or the “Government Auditing Code of the Philippines”, authorize the reversion to the Unappropriated Surplus of the General Fund of the National Government, of accounts payable which have remained outstanding for at least two years and for which no actual claim has been filed, and accounts payable which are undocumented or not covered by perfected contracts or records.



Verification and analysis of the accounts of NCIP ROs revealed the following:

RO/Account

Deficiencies

Amount (P)

RO III

	



Due to Pag-ibig

	Non-moving accounts for the past 13 years.

	

	

	

279,582.55

Due to Other NGAs

	

         725,043.66

Due to Other GOCCs

	

81,036.00

RO CAR

	



Accounts Payable

	Educational Assistance Program (EAP) scholarship allowance amounting to P250,000.00 for CY 2019 has not been liquidate due to non-compliance by scholarship grantees to the program requirements, hence losing their entitlement the scholarship grant.

	Payable for the account of a former Job Order personnel amounting P7,657.38 has been long outstanding was due to the failure of the payee to submit documents requirements to support the payment of his salary

257,657.38

CO

Accounts Payable

	Outstanding for more than two years due to incomplete documents and no actual claim made by the payee

3,910.00

	Total

1,347,229.59

		

			

			We recommended and Management agreed to:

	

		  a.	Require the Accountant of RO III to:

			

	i.	verify, review and analyze the dormant liability accounts, as required under COA Circular 97-001 and effect the necessary adjustments to arrive at the correct balances as of year-end;



	ii.	comply with the provisions of Section III (1 and 2) of PD 1445; and



	iii.	consider requesting for write-off of subject accounts in accordance with the provisions of COA Circular No. 2016-005 dated December 19, 2016. 



b. Concerned Accounting Personnel of NCIP CO and RO CAR to immediately revert the account to accumulated surplus or deficit of the general fund.



c. Accounting Division of NCIP CO not to process DVs without the complete supporting documents.



Management Comment:



RO III:

During the exit conference, the Agency Head commented that he had already instructed the Accountant to prepare the request for write-off and submit immediately to the Audit Team for probable approval of the request.





Failure to renew fidelity bonds 



14.	The bonds of twenty-two AOs of NCIP RO VI/VII and one AO of RO X have expired but were not renewed with the BTr, contrary to the provisions of Treasury Circular No. 02-2009, resulting in the unprotected interest of the government in case of loss of agency funds. Moreover, the fidelity bond of the Disbursing Officer of RO XII amounting to P500,000.00 was insufficient to cover her accountability for cash advance of P2,215,000.00, contrary to Section 101 of P.D. 1445 and Item 5.1 of Treasury Circular No. 02-2009 dated August 6, 2009.



Section 7.2 of Treasury Circular No. 02-2009 states that “the fidelity bond of an accountable public officer shall be renewed before the expiration of the bond.”

	

Further, Section 101 of P.D. 1445 states that “1) Every officer of any government agency whose duties permit or require the possession or custody of government funds or property shall be accountable therefor and for the safekeeping thereof in conformity with law. 2) Every accountable officer shall be properly bonded in accordance with law.”

	

	RO

	Particulars

	VI/VII

	out of the forty-six (46) AOs, twenty-two (22) had expired bonds

	X

	Bond of 1 AO of RO X have expired but were not renewed with the BTr

	XII

	The fidelity bond of the Disbursing Officer amounting to P500,000.00 was insufficient to cover her accountability for cash advance of P2,215,000.00.

	

	While it can be noted that the existing cash advances in RO VI/VII were drawn before the bonds expired, the bonds have not been renewed with the Bureau of Treasury, to date.

	

	Interview with some of the Accountable Officers (AOs) revealed that they overlooked the renewal of their fidelity bonds as they were not informed by the Administrative Section of their respective expiration dates. While it is ideal for the Administrative Section to regularly monitor the validity of the fidelity bonds, this responsibility should ultimately rest with the Accountable Officers.



Further, the cash examination conducted on the outgoing Cashier of RO X last February 20, 2020 disclosed that the Cashier’s bond effectivity is only until November 14, 2019 and as of the date of cash examination, February 20, 2020, the bond renewal was still on process. Thus, the Cashier was not bonded from November 15, 2019 to February 20, 2020. 



	Moreover, a Disbursing Officer in RO XII was bonded in the approved amount of P500,000.00 for maximum accountability of P1,000,000.00. However, review of the accountability of the previous disbursing officer disclosed that she was granted cash advances aggregating to P3,200,000.00. Thus, the Disbursing Officer’s bond of P500,000.00 is considered insufficient to adequately cover her accountabilities and to safeguard cash in her custody.

	

	The insufficiency of bond coverage of accountable officer may result in the uncertainty of recovery of government funds in case of possible shortages or unrelieved losses resulting from the unlawful use of government funds or losses attributable to negligence in the safekeeping of such funds. This practice also shows weak internal control of cash.

		

	The failure of the AOs to renew their bonds with the Fidelity Fund is contrary to the provisions of Section 101 of PD 1445 and Treasury Circular No. 02-2009, resulting in unprotected interest of the government in case of loss or misuse of agency funds.

		

We recommended and Management agreed to direct the ROs VI/VII X, and XII to:



Region

Recommendation

Management Comment

VI/VII

     All concerned Accountable Officers (AOs) and the Chief Administrative Officers (CAO) to keep track of their bond expiration dates and promptly renew their bonds with the Bureau of Treasury at least one (1) month before cancellation.

     Management has informed the audit team that out of the twenty-two (22) AOs with expired bonds as of December 31, 2020, one (1) has already renewed his bond and seven (7) have fully liquidated their outstanding cash advances. The audit recommendations have been properly disseminated to all of the agency’s AOs and regular monitoring of bond validity will be done by the Chief Administrative Officer.

X

     All concerned AOs and the CAO to keep track of their bond expiration dates and promptly renew their bonds with the Bureau of Treasury at least one (1) month before cancellation.

     Management has pledged to follow-up the bond renewals of the AOs mentioned above. Ms. J. Salinas was designated as the person in charge of monitoring bond expiration dates, which is periodically reviewed by the Chief Administrative Officer.

XII

     Limit the accountabilities of the Accountable Officers to what is provided under Annex C of Section 5.1 of Bureau of Treasury Circular No. 02-2009 dated August 6, 2009.  Otherwise, Management shall increase their fidelity bonds to amount sufficient to cover the maximum accountabilities that they may handle for a given period, so as to protect the interest of the agency in case of losses resulting from unlawful use of government funds and losses attributable to negligence in the safekeeping of such funds

     Management justified that the delay in the opening of the School Year 2020 -2021 due to COVID 19 pandemic resorted them to the granting of cash advances intended for the 1st semester of SY 2020-2021 in order to save the amount from the automatic reversion of funds when the amount remains unutilized at the end of the quarter. The amount of bond exceeded the Disbursing Officer’s accountability because there was no other way to save the amount due to the limited number of checks available and that no other accountable officer is allowed to draw cash advance per guidelines on the grant of cash advances. The cash advances as stated were fully liquidated as of November 30, 2021 and that no funds were lost nor misappropriated.



	

Delayed and unsubmitted of payroll liquidations, DVs, FRs, POs and other documents.



15.	Disbursement Vouchers (DVs), Financial Reports (FRs), Purchase Orders (POs), Educational Assistance Program (EAP) Agreement, perfected contracts and other transaction documents of NCIP-CO, ROs I, II, II, IX, X, XII and XIII were not submitted, which resulted in significant delays ranging from 11 to 365 days were noted in the submission to the Audit Team, thus, precluding the timely audit of transactions and communication of noted deficiencies, if any.



Section 7, Item 7.2.1 of COA Circular No. 2009-006 dated September 15, 2009 requires that:



The Chief Accountant, Bookkeeper or other authorized official performing accounting and/or bookkeeping functions of the audited agency shall ensure that: a) the reports and supporting documents submitted by the accountable officers are immediately recorded in the books of accounts and submitted to the Auditor within the first ten (10) days of the ensuing month.”



Section 122 of PD 1445 on the submission of reports provides that:



Whenever deemed necessary in the exigencies of the service, the Commission may under regulations issued by it require the agency heads, chief accountants, budget officers, cashiers, disbursing officers, administrative or personnel officers, and other responsible officials of the various agencies to submit trial balances, physical inventory reports, current plantilla of personnel, and such other reports as may be necessary for the exercise of its functions.



Failure on the part of the officials concerned to submit the documents and reports mentioned herein shall automatically cause the suspension of payment of their salaries until they shall have complied with the requirements of the Commission.



No appropriation authorized in the GAA shall be available to pay the salary or any official or employee who violates the provisions of this section, without prejudice to any disciplinary action that may be instituted against such official or employee.





Paragraph 3.1.1 of COA Circular No. 2009-001 dated February 12, 2009 provides that: 



Within five (5) working days from the execution of a contract by the government or any of its subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities, including government-owned and controlled corporations and their subsidiaries, a copy of said contract and each of all the documents forming part thereof by reference or incorporation shall be furnished to the Auditor of the agency concerned.  In case of agencies audited on an engagement basis, submission of a copy of the contract and its supporting documents shall be to the Auditor of the mother agency or parent company, as the case maybe.



Also, Paragraph 3.2.1 of the same Circular states that a copy of any purchase order irrespective of amount, and each and every supporting document, shall within five working days from issuance thereof, be submitted to the Auditor concerned.  Within the same period, the Auditor shall review and point out to management defects and/or deficiencies, if any.



Section 6.04 of COA Circular No. 95-006 dated May 18, 1995 states that the Disbursing Officer, in particular, shall faithfully comply with Section 100 of PD 1445 where Section 100 provides that disbursing officers in any government agency shall render monthly reports of their transactions pursuant to regulations of the Commission to be submitted not later than the fifth day of the ensuing month to the auditor concerned who shall conduct the necessary examination and audit within thirty days from receipt thereof.



Also, Section 6.05 of the same Circular provides that the officials involved in the daily recording of transactions in the books of accounts (Accountant, Financial Analyst or Bookkeeper) shall turn-over the receipts and disbursement reports together with all supporting documents evidencing the transactions, to the auditor, within ten (10) days from date of receipt of said documents.



Section 15, Chapter 2 of the GAM, Volume I prescribes that the Financial Statements shall present fairly the position, financial performance and cash flows of an entity. Fair presentation requires the faithful representation of the effects of transactions, other events, and conditions in accordance with the definitions and recognition criteria for assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses set out in the Philippine Public Sector Accounting Standards (PPSAS).



Chapter 19, Section 60 of the GAM, Volume I requires the submission of Financial Statements (FSs) and schedules by the Central/Head/Main Offices of NGAs within the prescribed deadline, as follows:





Statement/Report

Deadline

Submit to

Monthly

Trial Balance (TB) and Supporting Schedules

10 days after the end of the month

Auditor, DBM, Management

Quarterly

TB, FSs, Supporting Schedules

10 days after the end of the quarter

Auditor, DBM, Management

Yearend

TB, FSs, Supporting Schedules (combined Central Office, Regional Offices and Operating Units)

February 14 of the following year

Auditor, DBM, COA-GAS



Section 5a (6) of Administrative Order No. 05 – the NCIP Guidelines on the Merit-Based Scholarship and Educational Assistance. Under the said AO, one of the general criteria for selection of grantee is the willingness to sign an undertaking to serve his/her community/Ancestral Domain after completion of his/her studies should be opportunity.



Review and analysis of financial transactions in the following NCIP Offices disclosed non-compliance with the above cited laws, rules and regulations, as summarized on the next page.



RO

Deficiencies Noted

CO

Significant delays ranging from 11 to 365 days were noted in the submission of FRs, DVs and other documents to the Audit Team

I

DVs and its supporting documents for the month of December 2020 were not submitted to the Audit Team as of February 16, 2021. Review of RCI and RADAI  revealed that the agency had incurred expenses amounting to P4,315,975.23 and P1,842,784.52, respectively, or a total amount of P6,158,759.75 for the month of December 2020.

II

Unsubmitted copies of POs and perfected contracts within five working days upon its issuance/execution contrary to COA Circular No. 2009-001 thus, the timely and objective review of the transaction could not be undertaken.

III

Payments to 68 beneficiary-students under the EAP in RO III amounting to P1,490,000.00 were not supported with the individual EAP Agreements between NCIP and the grantees contrary to Administrative Order No. 05 series of 2012 and Section 5(f), Chapter 2 of the GAM, Volume I

IX

DVs, Liquidation Reports, TBs, BRSs and other required reports were not submitted within the prescribed period

X

Delayed submission of FRs and vouchers ranging from 140 to 222 days, and also a reiteration of PYs findings, but still failed to comply on timely submissions of said documents

XII

	Various Disbursement Vouchers and corresponding supporting documents from CY 2017 to August of CY 2020 amounting to P2,494,056.44 were not submitted as of December 31, 2020, thus, precluded the audit team of the prompt audit of the transactions, early detection and correction of errors/deficiencies and timely reporting of the audit results to the management, in contravention with Section 7 of COA Circular No. 2009-006, Sections 107 and 122 of P.D. 1445 and other existing regulations. 

XIII

	The delay in the submission of  DVs, Checks and Advices to Debit Account Disbursements Records, Bank Reconciliation Statements, Trial Balance and financial reports ranging from one (1) to 269 days and the non-submission of other related accounting reports



The late submission of the FRs, DVs and other transaction documents to the Audit Team prevented the Audit Team from conducting timely audit of the accounts and transactions, and prompt reporting on the results of the audit.



We recommended that Management require the:



Region

Recommendation

Management Comment

CO

    We recommended that Management require the Concerned Accounting and HRMD Personnel to submit the required supporting documents to the Audit Team within the prescribed deadlines to facilitate the timely review/audit of the accounts

     Due to community quarantine and limitations in physical reporting, the employees were instructed to submit weekly work accomplishment reports in lieu of DTRs from 16 March 2020. NCIP Memorandum Order No. 269 issued 29 May 2020 also mentioned the same.



     Since all work accomplishment reports were submitted and monitored electronically, the offices have been working back on the previous months to be able to complete the requirements in hard copies with original signature.



     With this, it is humbly requested that the COA can extend the acceptance of the payroll liquidation within the following schedule.

--	March – July to be submitted on March 10, 2021

--	August – December to be submitted on March 31, 2021

I

     Accounting Units to submit the DVs and duly supporting documents to the Audit Team within the prescribed period to enable the timely reporting of audit results

    On February 23, 2021, the DVs and its supporting documents were already submitted to the Audit Team.

II

      We recommended and management committed to submit copy of purchase orders and their supporting documents within five working days upon perfection thereof pursuant to COA Circular No. 2009-001 for the immediate correction or resolution of any defect that may be detected in the contract review and inspection of deliveries.

     No management comment.

III

     Requires the EAP Focal Person to strictly observe the implementing guidelines of the NCIP Scholarship Program prescribed under the NCIP Administrative Order No. 05.



     Ensures full compliance with the documentary requirements for all government transactions under existing laws, rules and regulations prior to processing and payments thereof.

      The management positively agreed on the audit recommendations. The concerned personnel assured the Audit Team of the full compliance of the recommendations.

IX

     Concerned officials to devise a strategy to improve the disbursement process, to cope with the backlogs regarding the submission of vouchers and financial reports, to ensure that supporting documents are complete and include this among its priority plans for the year.



     Coordination among the Budget Officer, Cashier/ Collecting Officer and other Division Chiefs concerned, to be able to prepare the financial statements and other reports and be submitted to the COA on time

     According to the Regional Accountant, the delay in the submission of Trial Balances, Bank Reconciliation, Liquidation Reports and Disbursement Vouchers was primarily caused by the sudden declaration of lockdown due to COVID 19 that prompted the Office to resort on a work-from-home scheme. By that time, paid vouchers cannot be segregated since the documents were left in the office. When the lockdown was already lifted, the office resorted to a skeletal work force, with which time for the segregation was limited and the documents have already piled up. Job order employees were already instructed to help in the segregation of supporting documents on their free hours while the Acting Cashier prepared the LDDAP-ADA and Checks for vouchers that are coming in.



As much as they really wanted to forward these vouchers to COA but the time and the volume of documents greatly hampered.  Another reason on the delay of the submission of vouchers was the delay in the transmission of Official Receipts from the field offices. We are now looking for ways that would help speed up the transmission of these receipts.

X

     Accounting Units to submit the DVs, FRs and duly supported with documents to the Audit Team within the prescribed period to enable the timely reporting of audit results.



     Accounting Units of RO X should see to it that the DVs have complete supporting documents before these will go to the office of the Cashier for the issuance of checks to avoid problems of delayed submission of documents.



    Concerned officials to devise a strategy to improve the disbursement process, to cope with the backlogs regarding the submission of vouchers and financial reports, to ensure that supporting documents are complete and include this among its priority plans for the year.

      No Management comment.

XII

     Accounting Units to submit the DVs, FRs and duly supported with documents to the Audit Team within the prescribed period to enable the timely reporting of audit results.



     Concerned officials to devise a strategy to improve the disbursement process, to cope with the backlogs regarding the submission of vouchers and financial reports, to ensure that supporting documents are complete and include this among its priority plans for the year.



     Acting Disbursing Officer and the Regional Accountant to work back and locate all those missing/unsubmitted DVs and their corresponding supporting documents.

     Management commented that they will require the Acting Cashier and the Regional Accountant to exhaust all means to locate all the un-submitted Disbursement Vouchers. The non-return of DVs in the cash section results in a domino effect on the part of the Accountant as there will be no DVs to be submitted to COA when the cash section does not forward the DVs to the Accounting Section. Management will get in touch with the previous disbursing officer since all the un-submitted DVs happened in her time.

XIII

     Accounting Units to submit the DVs, FRs and duly supported with documents to the Audit Team within the prescribed period to enable the timely reporting of audit results.



    Concerned officials to devise a strategy to improve the disbursement process, to cope with the backlogs regarding the submission of vouchers and financial reports, to ensure that supporting documents are complete and include this among its priority plans for the year.

      In their reply dated February 24, 2021, which we received on same day, Management commented that the accounting unit is exerting efforts on the timely submission of various financial reports. However, due to the pandemic, the submission within the prescribed period is greatly affected, and some other factors that cause the delay are the maintenance of the system in the URS wherein they cannot encode and retrieve the reports through online, i.e., FARs. They further stated that on the issue of delayed submission of DVs, the acting cashier would develop a mechanism to comply with the required documents on the expected time frame.



Auditor’s Rejoinder



RO IX:

Pursuant to Section 3.8 of the DBM Circular Letter No. 2018-14 dated December 28, 2018, which states that consistent with accounting and auditing rules and regulations, the National Government Agencies are reminded to require their creditors to issue Official Receipts (ORs) or Sales Invoice as evidence of receipt of payment through LLDAP-ADA and SLIE or MDS check. Sub-Section 3.8.1 of which further states that in case the supplier/contractor failed to submit OR of Sales Invoice, the list of bank-validated ADA shall be attached to the DV as proof of payment.  However, as further provided under sub-Section 3.8.3 of the same Circular Letter, non-issuance of OR or Sales Invoice by the contractor/supplier shall be reported to the BIR as violation of regulations.



 Another thing is that the State of National Health Emergency due to COVID 19 pandemic is being experienced by all of the agencies but other agencies were able to submit their financial reports and DVs on time.  The main reason for the delay in the submission of DVs according to the Regional Accountant and affirmed and discussed during the exit conference was due to the processing of DVs without the approval or signature of the former Regional Director base on the verbal instructions of the latter due to her frequent travels. The new leadership however, assured that such malpractice will no longer happen and that no disbursements will be processed without the approval of the head of the agency.





	Unreliable Leave Balances

	

16.	The NCIP RO VI/VII practices in the monitoring and monetization of leave credits were not in accordance with the Omnibus Rules on Leave, rendering the accuracy of the leave credit balances, unreliable.

	

	Section 1 of Rule XVI of the Omnibus Rules on Leave states that appointive officials and employees of the government whether permanent, temporary or casual, who render work during the prescribed office hours, shall be entitled to 15 days’ vacation and 15 days’ sick leave annually with full pay exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, Public Holidays, without limitation as to the number of days of vacation and sick leave that they may accumulate.

	

	Section 21 of the same Rule, provides that in addition to vacation, sick, maternity and paternity leave, officials and employees with or without existing or approved Collective Negotiation Agreement (CNA), except teachers and those covered by special leave laws, are granted special leave privileges subject to the conditions hereunder stated:



a.	that the official, employee may be granted a maximum of three (3) days within a calendar year of any or combination of special leave privileges of his choice which he would opt to avail; and



b. that such privileges shall be non-cumulative and non-commutative.



	Section 22, also provides that officials and employees in the career and non-career service whether permanent, temporary, casual or coterminous, who have accumulated fifteen (15) days of vacation leave credits shall be allowed to monetize a minimum of ten (10) days: Provided, that at least five (5) days is retained after monetization and provided further that a maximum of thirty (30) days may be monetized in a given year.

	

	Section 23, further states that monetization of fifty percent (50%) or more of all the accumulated leave credits may be allowed for valid and justifiable reasons subject to the discretion of the agency head and the availability of funds.



	Moreover, Section 25 thereof, requires that all officials and employees with 10 days or more vacation leave credits shall be required to go on vacation leave whether continuous or intermittent for a minimum of five (5) working days annually under the following conditions:



a. the mandatory annual five-day vacation leave shall be forfeited if not taken during the year. However, in cases where the scheduled leave has been cancelled in the exigency of the service by the head of the agency, the scheduled leave not enjoyed shall no longer be deducted from the total accumulated vacation leave; and

	

	b. those with accumulated vacation leave of less than ten (10) days shall have the option to go on forced leave or not. However, officials and employees with accumulated vacation leave of 15 days who availed of monetization for 10 days, under Section 22 hereof, shall still be required to go on forced leave.



	Verification of the Leave Cards of five (5) personnel of the agency disclosed the following deficiencies:

	

a)	some personnel availed of special leave privileges in excess of the allowable three (3) days within a calendar year;

	

b)		Regular Monetization of Vacation Leave (VL) of less than ten (10) days, the prescribed minimum, were granted to some personnel;



c)		Special Monetization of the accumulated VL and SL balances below the 50% minimum, were granted to personnel;



d)		Forfeited Mandatory/Forced Leaves not taken during the year, were not deducted from the VL balances of some personnel; and

	

e)		Overstated/understated leave balances resulting from improper posting and mathematical/footing errors.

	

Validation of the status of implementation of the audit recommendations from the previous year revealed that while the HRMO was able to partially submit a number of corrected leave cards, the leave balances generated were still inaccurate. Moreover, she has yet to effect corrections on all of the agency personnel’s leave cards. Limitations brought about by alternative work arrangements have been the main reason for partial compliance.

	

	Inquiry with the Chief Administrative Officer also disclosed that the creation of a committee to backtrack the computation of correct leave balances did not push through during the year as overlapping activities and the limited manpower available in the Administrative Section have hindered the intended compliance to the recommendations. She also informed us that management is planning to hire additional personnel to assist the HRMO.



The deficiencies observed in all five (5) sample Leave Cards, suggests that there is a high probability that the rest of the Leave Cards have overstated/understated balances. The incorrect computations, postings and omissions, as well as the improper grant of monetization, are factors which contributed to the unreliable leave credit balances of the agency’s personnel.



	

	We recommended and Management agreed to:



a)	create a Committee or hire/assign additional personnel to backtrack computation of the correct leave balances as reflected in the leave cards and ensure that:

	

	i.	the entries for under times and absences reported in the leave cards match the data indicated in the DTRs;

	

	ii.	only a maximum of three (3) Special Leave Privileges are granted to employees within a calendar year;

	

	iii. Regular and Special Monetization are in compliance with Sections 22 and 23 of the Omnibus Rules on Leave;

	

	iv.	forfeited Mandatory/Forced Leaves are properly deducted from the Leave Card balances, unless disapproved by the Agency Head due to the exigency of the service; and

	

v.	leave cards are updated monthly with the utmost care and the balances be properly indicated;

	

b)		require the Designated HRMO to:

	

i)	regularly review the DTRs, Applications for Leave and supporting documents, and the postings made to the leave cards; and

		

ii)	undergo additional training with the Civil Service Commission on all aspects of personnel management to enhance/improve the system in place.

	

Management Comment

	

	During the exit conference, Management informed the audit team that they will be hiring a Contract-of-Service (COS) worker to assist the Designated HRMO. A committee will also be created to backtrack the postings made to the leave cards, prioritizing the LCs of personnel who will be retiring in the coming years. 





	Non-compliance with existing COA rules on the use of motor vehicles 

	

17.	Motor Vehicles of RO III and RO XII were not marked with prescribed “For Official Use Only,” contrary to provisions of COA Circular 75-6 item V. 2 dated November 7, 1975 which may have resulted to unnecessary and unofficial use of government vehicles. The agency also did not provide a garage for the protection of said government properties against wear and tear due to exposure to the elements. 



Item V (2) of COA Circular No. 75-6 dated November 7, 1975 provides that:



All motor vehicles owned by the National Government, its agencies and instrumentalities, and all local government units including government-owned or controlled corporations should be plainly marked FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY (3 inches), under which should be written the corresponding name of the bureau, office, corporation, provincial, city, municipality, or other local government unit operating or using the same. The mark should appear on each side of the motor vehicle. 



Similarly, all government vehicles shall bear government plates only, except security vehicle exempt from using government plates. Likewise, all government vehicles are required when not in use to be kept in the garage provided therefore by the Office to which they belong except when in use for strictly official business outside the office hours.



As of November 30, 2020, RO III has three government-owned motor vehicles and it was noted during the physical inventory that one (1) of the motor vehicles Navarra Pick-up (Earth Brown) 2018 with Chassis Number MNTC CC4D23Z0039034 acquired in 2018 amounting to P1,351,500.00 is without the required markings, contrary to laws, rules and regulations. To date said vehicle had no government plate, bearing conduction sticker only with No. FDZ606.  It was also noted and observed that there is no provision for adequate garage for the government vehicles when not in use thus exposing the same to the elements which may further result in the undue deterioration thereof.  



According to the Property Officer, there is no provision for garage and the vehicles are being parked on the available parking lot of the building they are renting. 



Review of the Property Acknowledgement Receipts (PARs) and partial inventory of the motor vehicles of RO XII revealed that two (2) of the vehicles do not bear government plates and are not marked “FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY”. One of them has no corresponding name and logo of NCIP, listed as follows:



 Unit

Description

Property Number

Remarks

1

Nissan NAVARA Pick-up truck 4x2 6MT, 2019 model, Motor # YD25806844T, Chassis, MNTCC2D23ZOO49072, Plate # MV FILE 1501-189002

MTR-VEH-REG-0005

Non-government plate,  not marked “FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY” and no corresponding name and logo of NCIP

1

Mitsubishi Adventure GLX Wagon Color Blue, Engine #4D56A-L8659, Chassis #PAEVSWLXIB 0002918, with Plate # CSC 199

MTR-VEH-REG-0003

Non-government plate and   not marked “FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY”. 





We recommended that management: 



Region

Recommendation



Management Comment

III

      Instruct the concerned personnel for the proper markings of “For Official Use Only” on the subject motor vehicle together with the name and logo of the NCIP in consonance to the provisions of COA Circular 75-6 item V. 2 dated November 7, 1975; and



Concerned Official to make representation with the higher authorities for the provision of funds needed in the construction of a garage for the   government vehicles.



     The management acknowledged the significance of the audit recommendations. However, the Agency Head informed the team that ever since there was no provision for garage due to renting of the building and sharing of parking lots to different tenants and business establishments. The Supply Officer assured the Audit Team that they will fully comply with the audit recommendations since only one motor vehicle has no marking.

XII

      Instruct the concerned personnel for the proper markings of “For Official Use Only” on the subject motor vehicle together with the name and logo of the NCIP in consonance to the provisions of COA Circular 75-6 item V. 2 dated November 7, 1975; 



    Require the property officer to secure government plate for the said vehicles; and



     Stop charging gasoline and other expenses for the said vehicles unless the required marking “FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY” (3 inches) under which should be written the corresponding name of the Office or Logo is implemented.



    Management assured the audit team that they will comply with all the audit recommendations.



	

	

	

	

	

Unutilized Cash Allocation/Underspending



18.	Lapsed National Cash Allocations (NCAs) of NCIP RO III amounting to P7,880,113.92 were reverted to the unappropriated surplus of the General Fund as a result of the constraints brought about by the pandemic, thus affecting the optimal fund utilization and timely implementation of the projects, programs and activities of the agency pursuant to DBM-National Budget Circular No. 578 dated January 06, 2020. Moreover, Cash allocations received by RO V during CY 2020 amounting P2,185,000.00 lapsed and were reverted to the National Treasury; thereby, resulted in unpaid operating expenses as at year-end.



The aforementioned Budget Circular provides that:



After the end of the validity period all unreleased appropriations or undisbursed funds shall be reverted to the unappropriated surplus of the General Fund, in accordance with Section 28, Chapter 4, Book VI of EO 292 and shall not be available for expenditure except by subsequent legislative enactment.



Likewise, DBM Circular Letter No. 2019-03 dated January 04, 2019 was issued to ensure that the timely implementation of programs, projects, disbursement, authorization documents are issued to make cash available within the scheduled program/project implementation period as reflected in the corresponding DBM evaluated Monthly Disbursement Program (MDP) submitted by the agencies.



For CY 2020, the RO III had received a total cash allocation of P80,751,870.00. Of this amount, 90.24 percent or P72,871,756.08 was utilized/disbursed leaving a balance of P7,880,113.92 or 9.76 percent were not utilized thus the amount were reverted to the National Treasury. Details are presented below: 

                    

	Period Covered

	NCA/NTA Received (P)

	Disbursement/ Utilization (P)

	Balance

	 (P)

	% of Utilization

	January to March

	16,188,137.00

	16,188,137.00

	         -

	100

	April to June

	20,926,261.45

	17,372,406.68

	 3,553,854.77

	83.01

	July to September

	20,273,126.62

	19,232,211.22

	 1,040,915.40

	94.86

	October to December 

	23,364,344.93

	20,079,001.18

	 3,285,343.75

	85.93

	Grand Total

	80,751,870.00

	72,871,756.08

	7,880,113.92

	90.24

	

	The failure to fully utilize its cash allocation was due to the non-implementation of some of the projects and activities, procurement and the delivery of supplies and materials needed by the agency.

	

	Had the agency effectively monitored and measured the cash balances and disbursement, they could have maximized the utilization of the government resources provided to them. This also indicated that the MDP prepared by management may not be realistic or not in sync with the timeliness set or there was inadequate procurement planning.

	

	Further verification also disclosed that the agency has received a total allotment of P73,039,267.03 with an unexpended allotment of P803,469.63 or 1.10 percent out of the total allotment for CY 2020.

	

	Inquiry with management revealed that they were not able to maximize their allocations for this year due to non-implementation of their projects, programs and activities and procurement of supplies and materials brought about by the continued COVID-19 pandemic, the adoption of alternative work arrangement and other precautionary measures.



Moreover, Review of Appropriations, Allotments and Obligations of RO V as of December 31, 2020 as reported in the Budget and Financial Accountability Reports (BFARs) disclosed under spending by P2,185,000.00, shown as follows: 



Particular

Amount (P)

Total Cash Allocation Received

                    46,620,833.71 

Less: Utilization/Disbursement during CY 2020



                    44,435,833.71

Reversal of unutilized NCA

     2,185,000.00





The amount reverted pertains to the general fund allotment issued in the 2nd quarter of CY 2020 which was not expended during the period due to inadequate processing of disbursement vouchers for the payment of the agency’s operating expenses.



On the contrary, RO V reported accounts payable aggregating to P2,218,093.45 as of December 13, 2020, broken down as follows:



Particular

Amount (P)

Personnel Services

     882,948.32

MOOE

1,335,145.13

Total

  2,218,093.45



Management replied that the reverted amount was on account of the National Budget Circular No. 580 dated April 22, 2020 specifically Item No. 4(1) which provides that:



To partially generate the required amounts to implement the national policy to address the COVID-19 situation, while observing the overall expenditure program for FY 2020, government instrumentalities concerned are advised that thirty-five percent (35%) of programmed appropriations under the FY 2020 GAA shall no longer be made available for release effective April 1, 2020. Likewise, at least ten percent (10%) of the total released allotments to covered entities under Sec. 2 hereof for MOOE and Capital Outlays (CO), shall no longer be available for obligation



Further, the amount of the reversion concerns to government share in the RLIP as it also adhered to DBM Circular Letter 2020-6 dated March 30, 2020 particularly Item No. 4(2) reads, “Starting April 2020, the DBM shall directly remit to the GSIS the government share in the RLIP contribution for all departments, bureaus and offices of the national government. A Special Allotment Release Order (SARO) reflecting the DBM as the responsible department charged with the remittance of the government share of the premium contribution to GSIS shall be issued. The corresponding NCA will likewise be released to the DBM on a quarterly basis”. 



The lapsed NCA was due to inability of the agency to disburse for the financial assistance to IP students; therefore, the agency incurred in delay in the delivery of its service to IP beneficiaries. It also failed to pay for its operating expenses purchased on account accumulating its payables at year-end thus, resulted in the reversion of funds and eventual recording of liabilities as of December 31, 2020.



We recommended that Management require the:



a. 	concerned officials of RO III to improve monitoring of cash balances and disbursements pertaining to implementation of programs, activities and projects considering the adoption of applicable strategies under the current pandemic situation to maximize the utilization of funds.



b. Accountant of RO V to:



i. determines all payables and promptly process the related disbursement vouchers;



ii. request for funds for the agency’s payables;



iii. submit all the necessary documents to DBM for funding; and 



iv. maximize utilization of the NCAs/NTAs received to avoid reversion thereof and accumulation of accounts payable at year end.

						

Management Comment



RO III:

Management positively acknowledged the audit recommendation. The Agency Head informed the Audit Team that this reversion was due to non-procurement and non-implementation of the projects for CY 2020 due to pandemic brought about by Covid-19.

						

RO V:

Management explained that the amount of P2,185,000 could have been used for payment of MOOE and GAA projects had there been approved disbursement vouchers submitted to the Accounting Unit at the end of the 2nd quarter; thereby, no Accounts Payable would have been recorded at year-end.



It also added that there were no NCA and NTA received for CY 2019 payables amounting to P172,099.52 and for SRI of P204,716.04 during the year, respectively.  However, request for NCA funding was already submitted to the Central Office on January 26, 2021 to cover all payables. 



It also committed to strictly monitor the Cash Disbursement Program per BED 3 schedule to maximize utilization of NCAs/NTAs received and closely coordinate with the Chief Administrative Officer on the Agency’s status of funds to avoid reversion thereof.





Continued use of an unnecessary Trust Account and Dormant funds in CIB-LCCA for re-evaluation and reversion

	

19.	NCIP-RO IV and VI/VII failed to re-visit the Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) of the unused funds under CIB-LCCA P1,081,922.54 and P139,116.61, to determine the term and purpose for which funds were established, and to revert to the National Treasury if the said were expired and purpose were attained in accordance to Section 10 of General Provision FY2020 of RA No. 11465 and Executive Order No. 338 dated May 7, 1996, thereby depriving the National Government of the optimum use of resources and exposing fund to possible misuse. 



Section 10 of the General Provision FY 2020 of Republic Act No. 11465 requires the reversion, closure, and transfer of balances of special accounts, fiduciary or trust funds, revolving funds, and unauthorized accounts, to wit:



All departments, bureaus, and offices, and instrumentalities of the National Government, including Constitutional Offices enjoying fiscal autonomy and SUCs are mandated to close and revert all balances of Special Accounts, Fiduciary or Trust Funds, and Revolving Funds to the General Fund in any of the following instances: (i) when there is no legal basis for its creation; (ii) when their terms have expired; (iii) when they no longer necessary for the attainment of purposes for which said funds were established.



Executive Order (EO) No. 338 dated May 7, 1996 requires that all government offices and agencies, unless otherwise specifically provided by law, to immediately transfer all monies in all government depository banks and institutions to the National Treasury, regardless of income source.



Audit revealed that the RO IV, CIB-LCCA totaling P7,846,387.20 includes unused funds totalling P1,081,92.54 which pertains to the remaining funds for Delineation and Titling donated on CY2008-2011 by Aglubang Intex amounting to P885,619.00 and for Philippine Plan Action to Control Tuberculosis Project transferred on CY2014-2015 by the Department of Health amounting to P196,303.54. These funds remained dormant due to the failure of the management to re-visit the Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) of the donated/transferred funds to determine the purpose and term for which funds were established, and to revert to the National Treasury if the said were expired and purpose were attained. 



	Audit of the RO VI/VII Cash in Bank - Local Currency, Current Account (CA 3292-1041-53) revealed that this trust account was set-up in CY 2013 to cater to the agency’s multi-year project funds for Ancestral Domain Sustainable Development and Protection Plan (ADSDPP), Certificate of Ancestral Domain Title (CADT) and Educational Assistance Program (EAP). Based on management’s justification in a letter addressed to the Bureau of the Treasury dated February 27, 2013 (Annex A), they cited the provisions of Republic Act No. 8371, otherwise known as Indigenous Peoples Rights Act of 1997 as legal basis of the creation of the trust account. 

		

Verification of the composition of the account as of December 31, 2020 disclosed that the cash balance of P139,116.61 of the trust account is broken down below.

		









Programs/Projects/Activities

Amount

(P)

1.

EPANAW Fund

133,855.15

2.

Bid Docs (J4 Computer & Office Supply Trading)

  5,000.00

3.

Interest Income

261.46



Total

139,116.61

		

		The amount pertaining to EPANAW Fund represents the unutilized portion of a project fund from the Tourism Promotions Board which should have concluded in December 2020. Due to delays in implementation brought about by the pandemic, implementation was extended until June 30, 2021. The trust account also includes proceeds from the sale of bid documents from a supplier and interest income earned from balances in prior years.

		

It was also disclosed that the Bureau of Treasury has recommended the closure of the trust account, as its contents are no longer necessary for the attainment of its purpose. It is also worth noting that management has appropriately reverted P1,100,745.20 to the account of the National Treasury in CY 2020.



Hence, the non-evaluation of the MOA of the said funds and non-remittance thereof if found expired and purpose were attained, deprives the National Government from the use of deposited cash for other priority projects and exposes funds to possible misuse.  





We recommended that Management: 



Region

Recommendation

Management Comment

IV

     Determine the purpose and term for which funds were established instruct the Concerned Official of RO IV to re-visit the MOA of the remaining funds for the Delineation and Titling donated by Aglubang Intex amounting to P885,619.00 and for Philippine Plan Action to Control Tuberculosis Project transferred by the Department of Health amounting to P196,303.54



      Revert to the National Treasury if the said funds were found expired and purpose were attained.

     The Management agreed with the recommendation and promised to revisit the MOA of the fund for Delineation and Titling amounting to P885,619.00, write a letter to Aglubang Intex, and revert to the National Treasury if the said funds were found expired and purpose were attained. Also, Management commented that the fund for Philippine Plan Action to Control Tuberculosis Project amounting to P196,303.54 is for reversion this March 2021.

VI/VII

    Utilize the remaining portion of the EPANAW Fund and liquidate the same to the Tourism Promotions Board.



     Revert the remaining P5,261.46 to the account of the National Treasury and effect closure of the agency’s Cash in Bank – Local Currency, Current Account (CA 3292-1041-53).

      During the exit conference, Management informed the Audit Team that additional disbursements out of the EPANAW Fund totaling P106,844.16 are already being processed by the Cashier for payment this March 2021. A DV for remittance of the interest income has also been prepared.





Allowance of Educational Assistance and Merit-Based Scholarship grantees paid out of CAs



	20.	Allowances for Educational Assistance and Merit-Based Scholarship grantees in RO XII P2,825,000.00 were paid out of the cash advances granted to the Disbursing Officer instead of depositing them directly to the respective bank accounts of the grantees, contrary to DBM Circular Letter No. 2018-014 dated December 28, 2018, thus, may result to possible risk of loss or misuse of the cash.  

	

	DBM Circular Letter No. 2013-16, dated December 23, 2013, mandated the NGAs to use the Expanded Modified Direct Payment Scheme (ExMDPS) for payment of Accounts Payables (A/Ps) due creditors/payees of all NGAs/OUs and the use of the List of Due and Demandable Accounts Payables - Advice to Debit Account (LDDAP-ADA) as an accountable form under the ExMDPS.

	

	The Circular expanded the coverage to include all departments/agencies/operating units and all types of creditors. Under this scheme, direct payment to the creditor's account is effected by MDS-GSBs chargeable against the Notice of Cash Allocation (NCA) credited under MDS sub-accounts of NGAs.

		

	To enhance compliance with the MDPS scheme, DBM Circular No. 2018-014 dated December 28, 2018 was issued to reiterate previously issued DBM Circulars and provide updated guidelines. 

	

	Verification of the Scholarship/Grants Expenses amounting to P5,850,000.00, as shown in the financial statements, revealed that a total of P2,825,000.00 was disbursed to Educational Assistance and Merit-Based Scholarship out of the cash advances granted to the Disbursing Officer and Disbursing Officer-Alternate, as shown below.

	

Check



Payee



Particulars



Amount (P)

No.

Date







989197

09/28/20

Melissa Akop

Cash advance re: Payment for EAP C/A

2,215,000.00

993304



09/28/20

Charina Manaois

Cash advance re: NCIP- EAP SY 2020-2021 for 2nd semester

610,000.00

Total





2,825,000.00



	Of the first cash advance of P2,215,000.00, P1,860,000.00 was disbursed to 186 grantees for Educational Assistance; P225,000.00 was disbursed to nine (9) grantees for Merit-Based Scholarship Program; and the remaining P130,000.00 was refunded and deposited to the Bureau of the Treasury. 



	The second cash advance of P610,000.00 intended for the second semester of the School Year 2020 to 2021, with a total of 61 grantees, per supporting list attached, was not yet disbursed as at year-end. This practice may result to losses attributable to negligence in the safekeeping of cash or possible misuse of the cash.



	This shows that a total of 256 grantees were paid in cash out of the advances to special disbursing officers instead of depositing them directly to their respective bank accounts as required under DBM Circular Letter No. 2018-014 dated December 28, 2018.



	Creditors/suppliers who cannot be conveniently nor practicably be paid using the ADA as determined by the Agency Head, may continue to be paid through issuance of MDS checks or cash. These accounts include small value creditors/payees with claims during the year costing P10,000 and below, e.g., government scholars, recipients of DOLE's Special Program for the Employment of Students (SPES).



	During the interview with the disbursing officer, the audit team was informed that the checks available were not enough to cater the number of grantees and the Bureau of the Treasury is not allowing them to procure voluminous checks and also the said grantees have no bank accounts, thus, the management resorted to granting of cash advance for payment of the stipends for the scholarship.



	Section 16 of Administrative Order No. 05 or the NCIP Guidelines of 2012 on the Merit-Based Scholarship (NCIP-MBS) and Educational Assistance (NCIP-EA) provides that for NCIP-MBS, all benefits stated in Section 14, items 2 to 5 and the excess of the tuition fee and miscellaneous fee will be deposited to his/her ATM account/Cash card/G-Card. For NCIP-EA, The Regional Office shall release financial benefits except tuition and miscellaneous fees to the individual grantee through check payment. In places where banks are not available, the Office may release the financial benefits to the grantees through cash advance.



We recommended that the Management:



 a.	requires and inform all the grantees that it is a must to open and submit to NCIP XII their respective bank accounts in order to deposit the educational allowances intended for them;



b.	issue checks as payment to the grantees with no bank accounts yet;



c.	allows the grant of cash advance to disbursing officer only for those grantees studying in places with no banks available; and 



d.	requires the personnel in-charge in the Scholarship/Grants to facilitate the early preparation and submission of their claims to avoid voluminous transactions pending in the accounting section especially at the end of the quarter, thus, to avoid also the granting of cash advance before the lapsing of the fund.



Management Comment:



	Management explained that some of the grantees of NCIP-EA and MBS had already have their previous ATMs but due to necessity, they were forced to withdraw the remaining balance resulting to the closure of accounts.  In CY 2020, they were mandatorily required to open their respective bank account but they suffered delay because of the restrictions during COVID 19 pandemic.  Majority of the grantees were below 18 years old and during that time, they were prohibited to go outside. Moreover, banks scheduled the opening of accounts and it took them one month for their schedules to take effect.





21.	  Non-compliance with RA 9184



21.1	NCIP RO XIII resorted to a Negotiated Procurement - Small Value Procurement (53.9) for the lease of privately owned real property for Regional Office use with an Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC) of P115,584.00 per month, or a total of P1,387,008.00 for one (1) year period, which were not supported with three (3) Request for Quotations (RFQs) of known qualifications, contrary to Item 8(b) (ii), Annex H of the Revised IRR of RA 9184; thus transparency and competitiveness of the procurement process could not be ascertained.



Item 8(b) (ii), Annex H of the Revised IRR of RA 9184 states the procedure that the BAC shall prepare and send the RFQs/RFPs to at least three (3) suppliers, contractors or consultants of known qualifications. This, notwithstanding, those who responded through any of the required postings shall be allowed to participate. Receipt of at least one (1) quotation is sufficient to proceed with the evaluation thereof.



Evaluation of the procurement on the lease of privately owned real property for Regional Office use through an alternative mode of Negotiated Procurement - Small Value Procurement (SVP) (53.9) with an Approved Budget for the Contract of P115,584.00 per month, or a total of P1,387,008.00 for one (1) year period were not supported with three (3) RFQs of known qualifications.



Based on BAC Resolution No. 2020-01 Declaring the Qualified Bidder and Recommending the Award for the Lease of Office Space for Regional Office, it stated thereof that the BAC invited three (3) prospective lessors to submit sealed price quotation for the lease of privately-owned real property to be used as Regional Office. However, there was no evidence or proof of receipt of RFQs by other suppliers or lessors. While the aforementioned provision provides that a receipt of at least one quotation is sufficient to proceed with the evaluation, there should still be a piece of evidence that at least three quotations were prepared and sent to qualified suppliers or lessors and duly received by them. In fact, the quotation submitted by the lone bidder dated August 21, 2020, was not the prescribed format but a mere letter in response to the invitation. There was no proof of receipt also that said lone bidder duly received the invitation.



Moreover, we noted that the Notice for Negotiated Procurement posted on the PhilGEPS website is dated February 18, 2021, yet, the BAC recommended the award of the contract to the lone bidder who is Samping Realty and Development Corporation per BAC Resolution No. 2020-01 on August 21, 2020, or six (6) months after the recommendation.



	The failure of the BAC to send RFQs to three suppliers/lessors or the lack of evidence thereof not only violated the aforementioned provision of RA 9184 but also deprived the government of obtaining the most advantageous price for such procurement as there were no quotations from other prospective lessors. As a result, other suppliers/lessors were not given a chance to participate in the procurement activity, which constituted a material defect in the procurement process and ultimately cast doubts on the transparency and competitiveness of the procurement process.   

	

We recommended that Management Require the BAC to strictly comply with the provisions of Item 8(b) (ii), Annex H of the Revised IRR of RA 9184 by obtaining three RFQs from qualified/eligible suppliers/lessors for procurement through small value procurement to ensure transparency and competitiveness of the procurement process. 





Management Comment



Management commented during the exit conference that there were three (3) Request for Quotations (RFQs) since they have invited three (3) lessors to participate in the procurement, but they just failed to attach it in the contract. They further assured to submit the three RFQs to the Audit Team as soon as possible.





21.2	The required advertisement and posting of procurement opportunity and the posting of Notice of Award in the Philippine Government Electronic Procurement System (PhilGEPS) website on the conduct of Negotiated Procurement-Small Value Procurement (53.9) for Lease of Real Property we’re not complied with by the NCIP RO XIII, contrary to Item IV, E (3), and L (2) of Annex H of 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of RA 9184; thus, defeating the principle of transparency in the procurement process.

 

Annex H of 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act (R.A.) 9184 consolidates the guidelines for alternative methods of procurement. Item IV, E (3) thereof provides the following, to read as follows:

	

E. Advertisement and Posting of Procurement Opportunity. For alternative methods of procurement, the Procuring Entity may dispense with the advertisement in the newspaper and posting requirement as prescribed in Section 21.2.1 of the IRR of R.A. 9184. For the following alternative methods, however, the BAC, through its Secretariat, shall post the procurement opportunity [e.g., Request for Quotation (RFQ) or Request for Proposal (RFP)] in the PhilGEPS website, the website of the Procuring Entity concerned, if available, and at any conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the premises of the Procuring Entity for a period of at least three (3) calendar days: 

Xxx



3)  Section 53.9 – Small Value Procurement, for projects with ABC above Fifty Thousand Pesos (P50,000.00).While Item IV, L (2) of Annex H of the same Act provides: L. Notice of Award; Contact Approval; Notice to Proceed. Xxx



2) Posting of Notice of Award, Contract and Notice to Proceed. Unless the contract involves and affects national security as determined by the HOPE in accordance with Section IV(D) of this Guidelines, the BAC, through its Secretariat, shall post the NOA, Contract/PO, including the NTP if necessary, for information purposes, in the PhilGEPS website, the website of the Procuring Entity concerned, if available, and at any conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the premises of the Procuring Entity within ten (10) days from their issuance, except for contracts with ABC of Fifty Thousand Pesos (P50,000.00) and below. 



Validation of the extent of the Agency’s compliance on the aforementioned advertisement and posting requirement of procurement opportunity revealed that Management failed to comply with the said requirement on the Lease of Real Property through Negotiated Procurement-Small Value Procurement (53.9) in the PhilGEPS website, the website of the Procuring Entity concerned for a period of at least three (3) calendar days.



Likewise, for information purposes, the corresponding Notice of Award was not posted on the PhilGEPS website and at any conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the premises of the Procuring Entity within ten (10) days from their issuance.



The failure of the BAC to post the required advertisement and posting opportunity and the corresponding Notice of Award for the procurement of Lease of Real Property in the PhilGEPS website is contrary to above-mentioned provisions of RA 9184 and its Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR), thus defeating the objective of transparency in the procurement process.

	

We recommended that Management strictly comply with the provisions of Item IV, E (3), and L (2) of Annex H of 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of RA 9184 on the posting of the Advertisement and Procurement Opportunity and the corresponding Notice of Award in the PhilGEPS website to promote transparency in the procurement process.



Management Comment:

	

Management commented during the exit conference that they have already submitted the printout of the Request for Quotation (RFQ) posted on the PhilGEPS website, while the corresponding Notice of Award is soon to follow. Management further justified in their letter signed by the supply officer that the posting for the Lease of Office Space for Regional Office was posted only on January 27, 2021, due to PhilGEPS maintenance and to comply with the requirements for the electronic procurement process of the government. Accordingly, it was hard on the part of the supply officer since the website is not accessible and no internet connection yet at that time. She needs to go to the internet café just to have a fast internet connection but still failed. The PhilGEPS website was not properly working at that time, which is beyond her control.



Auditor’s Rejoinder:



Verification of the submitted printout Request for Quotation (RFQ) posted on the PhilGEPS website unveiled that management indeed submitted it. However, the date it was published was on January 27, 2021, while the lease contract was notarized on September 1, 2020, with a one (1) year term commencing on October 1, 2020, to October 1, 2021, or almost five (5) months after the contract was notarized; thus, it becomes doubtful. Normally, procurement should be done prior to entering into a new contract; therefore, it should have done on the dates prior to awarding the contract on August 21, 2020, as evidenced by BAC Resolution No. 2020-01, and not months after the award. Obviously, management fell short in compliance with the law on the 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of RA 9184. The posting of the procurement opportunity on the PhilGEPS website is apparently for compliance purposes only.



On the justification of poor internet connection which prevented them from posting the procurement opportunity in the PhilGEPS website, the agency still occupying in their previous location at that time, hence internet connection is not a problem, to begin with. Management’s internet connection problem occurred only when they had already transferred to their new office in Samping building and not when they were still at their previous office at Intino building.



However, during the virtual exit conference, management acknowledged their shortcomings and gave assurance to comply with the law on procurements in the succeeding procurement activities.





21.3	A total amount of P100,165.00 for van rental was paid to FRC Transport Services, which is owned by a certain employee of NCIP RO XIII, contrary to the provisions of PD 1445. Moreover, the employed alternative mode of procurement through Shopping is not in consonance with the guidelines set in the Revised IRR of RA 9184.



Section 108 of PD 1445 provides for the prohibition against pecuniary interest which expressly states that “no accountable or responsible officer shall be pecuniary interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract or transaction of the agency in which he is such an officer.”



	On the other hand, Rule XVI, Section 48.2 of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA 9184 specifies that in accordance with Section 10 of this IRR, as a general rule, the Procuring Entities shall adopt competitive bidding as the general method of procurement and shall see to it that the procurement program allows sufficient lead time for such competitive bidding. Alternative methods of procurement shall be resorted to only in highly exceptional cases provided for in this Rule.



Furthermore, as provided in Item V. C of Annex H of the said IRR, the alternative mode of procurement through Shopping shall be employed in any of the following cases:



a)	When there is an unforeseen contingency requiring immediate purchase, the amount shall not exceed Two Hundred Thousand Pesos (P200,000.00) for NGAs, GOCCs, GFIs, SUCs, and Autonomous Regional Government;



b)	Xxx

	

Examination of the disbursements out of the ELCAC funds revealed that the Agency paid a total of P100,165.00 for payment of hired van to FRC Transport Services in the conduct of various activities. It was noted that there were at least four (4) transactions entered into by the Agency with FRC Transport Services during the year, as shown in table hereunder:



ADA

DV/ Payroll No.

ORS No.

Payee

Nature of Payment

Amount (P)

Date

Serial No.











3/13/2019

101-03-026-2019

19030200

2019-03-0201

FRC Transport Services

Payment for hired       van sending invitation for the RDC-CIPC meeting

P  10,450.00

12/16/2019

9900130269

19122576

2019-12-1449

FRC Transport Services

Payment for hired van during ELCAC Regional Action Planning

61,560.00

12/16/2019

9900130269

19122634

2019-12-1452

FRC Transport Services

Payment for hired van for travel to Cagayan de Oro City

6,305.00

12/16/2019

9900130269

19122635

2019-12-1453

FRC Transport Services

Payment for hired van during inventory 

21,850.00

                                                     Total

P100,165.00



Scrutiny of the Disbursement Vouchers and its supporting documents disclosed that FRC Transport Services, a Non-VAT Registered entity with TIN:924-780-513-000, is owned by a certain employee of the agency.  His name and signature also appeared in the “Conforme” by the supplier portion in the Purchase Order.



Therefore, in adherence to the provisions of PD 1445, the said employee is prohibited from having pecuniary interest and engaging in any contract or transaction with NCIP RO XIII, where he is currently employed and functions as one of its officers in one of its Service Centers.

 

On the other hand, the alternative mode of procurement through Shopping employed in this transaction is not appropriate since it did not meet the criteria enumerated in Item V. C of Annex H of the 2016 Revised IRR. As defined in Section 52.1 thereof, Shopping is a method of procurement of Goods whereby the Procuring Entity simply requests for the submission of price quotations for readily available off-the-shelf goods or ordinary/regular equipment to be procured directly from suppliers of known qualifications. 



Further, Section 52.2 of the same IRR states that:



The phrase “ordinary or regular office supplies” shall be understood to include those supplies, commodities, or materials which are necessary in the transaction of official businesses, and consumed in the day-to-day operations.



However, office supplies shall not include services such as repair and maintenance of equipment and furniture, as well as trucking, hauling, janitorial, security, and related or analogous services.



Thus, hiring a van to conduct passengers during the different activities of the Agency is not unforeseen or urgent; hence, it does not fall in the above provisions so that Shopping should not have been employed.



We also observed that the Abstract of Bids was not signed by all of the Bids and Awards Committee (BAC) members, and approval of the Head of the Procuring Entity (HOPE) was not indicated therein. One of the functions of the BAC enumerated in Section 12 of RA 9184 is to recommend the award of contracts to the Head of the Procuring Entity or his duly authorized representative. It can be presumed in this transaction that the Abstract of Bids is the document used by the BAC in their recommendation of the award of contract for approval of the HOPE in the absence of a BAC Resolution. The GPPB in its Non-Policy Opinion (NPM) No. 131-2014 states that:



The Abstract of Quotations does not necessarily include the BAC’s recommendation to the HOPE relative to the award of contract. Such BAC recommendation is properly made through the issuance of a BAC Resolution. Nonetheless, the Guidelines does not prohibit nor proscribe the procuring entity from including in the Abstract of Quotations the BAC"s recommendation for award of contract in order to promote efficiency in the conduct of Shopping or Small Value Procurement. Such recommendation contained in the Abstract of Quotations must be duly signed by the members of the BAC or its duly authorized or delegated unit.



Failure to use the appropriate method of procurement and to abide by procurement rules and regulations is a violation of the provisions of RA 9184.



We recommended that Management require the BAC to:



a)	Submit an explanation on the absence of Resolution recommending to the HOPE to enter into a contract with the employee/officer of NCIP RO XIII and why the alternative mode of procurement through Shopping was employed;



b)	Adhere to the provisions of PD 1445 on the prohibition against pecuniary interest by any accountable or responsible officer in any contract or transaction of the agency where he is an officer; and



c)	Adhere to the provisions of RA 9184 and its Revised IRR in every step of the procurement process and in the determination of the appropriate mode of procurement to be employed.



Management Comment



On recommendation no. 1, management justified in their letter-reply which we received on December 28, 2020, that while the BAC did not issue a resolution recommending the award of contract, the abstract of quotation contained in the signatures of the members of the BAC (or it’s duly authorized or delegated unit), which, under the above GPPB-NPM, constitute a manifestation of the BAC recommendation in lieu of the resolution.



Auditor’s Rejoinder



	We opined that, presupposing all BAC members duly signed the abstract of quotation, there was no statement thereof of the recommendation of award to the lowest bidder as viewed in the above GPPB Resolution. There was no explanation either why the alternative mode of procurement through Shopping was employed instead of public bidding. However, the transaction for van rental could have resorted to an alternative mode of procurement. Still, it should have been through Negotiated Procurement-Small Value Procurement (53.9), as the shopping pertains to readily available off-the-shelf goods or ordinary/regular equipment. The termed ordinary or regular office supplies shall be understood to include those supplies, commodities, or materials which are necessary for the transaction of official business and consumed in the day-to-day operations; thus, the procurement should not have been through shopping method as the van rental is explicitly not deemed as off-the-shelf goods.



On recommendation no. 2, management, in their reply dated December 4, 2020, which we received on December 28, 2020, argued that:



In the case of Flordeliza F. Querijero v. The People of the Philippines and the Sandiganbayan, the Court clarified who is n accountable officer, and to quote:



“An accountable officer under Art. 217 of the Revised Penal Code is a public officer who, by reason of his office, is accountable for public funds or property. Sec. 101 (1) of the Government Accounting Code of the Philippines (P.D. No. 1445) defines accountable officer to be every officer of any government agency whose duties permit or require the possession or custody of government funds or property and who shall be accountable therefor and for the safekeeping thereof in conformity with law. In the determination of who is an accountable officer, it is the nature of the duties which he performs-the fact that, as part of his duties, he received public money for which he was bound to account, and not the nomenclature or the relative importance the position held-which is the controlling factor. (Emphasis supplied)



Here, while Fernando R. Curato, the owner of the FRC Transport Services passenger van rented by the NCIP is an employee of the NCIP, he does not qualify as an accountable officer as defined by the above jurisprudence. He has not duty, or required to take possession or custody of government funds or property for safekeeping. The nature of the duty that he performs, or part thereof, does not involved receiving money or property for which he was bound to account. Hence, the provision of PD 1445 on the prohibition against pecuniary interest by an accountable or responsible officer in any contract or transaction of the NCIP does not apply to him.



Further, the amount of the rental contract maybe found advantageous to the agency as shown in the abstract of quotations.



The issue being raised here is whether or not Mr. Fernando Curato adhered or violated the law pertaining to pecuniary interest as provided for in Section 108 of PD 1445, which expressly states for the prohibition against pecuniary interest that no accountable or responsible officer shall be pecuniary interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract or transaction of the agency in which he is such an officer. Management focused only on the definition of an accountable officer if such term applies to Mr. Curato, whose duty is not directly involved in the possession or safekeeping of government funds and property.



Section 4 (2) of COA Circular 2009-006, dated September 15, 2009, defined Accountability which refers to the answerability for government funds of every public officer whose duties permit or require the possession or custody of such government funds in conformity with laws and regulations. Other public officers, although not accountable for government funds by the nature of their duties, may likewise be similarly held accountable and responsible therefor through their participation in the use or application of such government funds. Thus, the termed accountable officer does not literally confine to imply as the cashier or collecting officer only.



Although Mr. Fernado Curato,  Acting Community Development Officer of San Luis Community Service Center, San Luis, Agusan del Sur, who is the highest-ranking officer of the said service center of NCIP Caraga, may not be an accountable officer per se, but deemed as a responsible officer and may hold accountable considering he is an officer and occupies as the head of the office to which he was assigned of; thus, Mr. Curato has an undue influence of any contract or transaction from the office to which he belongs, either directly or indirectly.

In addition to the above, Republic Act 6713 known as the "Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees, an Act Establishing a Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees, to Uphold the Time-honored Principle of Public Office being a Public Trust. 



Section 2 thereof states the Declaration of Policies that “Public officials and employees shall at all times be accountable to the people and shall discharge their duties with utmost responsibility, integrity, competence, and loyalty, act with patriotism and justice, lead modest lives, and uphold public interest over personal interest.” (emphasis added)



Likewise, Section 1 of Rule IX of the same act specified the Conflict of Interest and Divestment which states that:

 

(a) An official or employee shall avoid conflict of interest at all times. 

(b) Conflict of interest occurs when the official or employee is: 



(1) a substantial stockholder; or 

(2) a member of the Board of Directors; or

(3) an officer of the corporation; or 

(4) an owner or has substantial interest in a business; or 

(5 a partner in a partnership. xxx



Moreover, Section 1, Rule X of the said act provides among others that “In addition to the grounds for administrative disciplinary action prescribed under existing laws, the acts and omissions of any official or employee, whether or not he holds office or employment in a casual, temporary, hold-over, permanent or regular capacity, declared unlawful or prohibited by the Code, shall constitute grounds for administrative disciplinary action, and without prejudice to criminal and civil liabilities provided herein, such as: 



(a) Directly or indirectly having financial and material interest in any transaction requiring the approval of his office. Financial and material interest is defined as a pecuniary or proprietary interest by which a person will gain or lose something. xxx 



In view of the foregoing, it is imperative to remind Mr. Fernando Curato that a public office is a public trust; thus, one must uphold public interest over personal interest. Conflict of interest occurs when the official or employee is an owner or has a substantial interest in a business that Mr. Curato failed to avoid. Clearly, Mr. Curato violated the prohibition against pecuniary interest being the owner of the van rented by NCIP Caraga to which he is an officer pursuant to the provisions of PD 1445 and RA 6713. 



Further, we disagree with what management claimed that the amount of the rental contract may be found advantageous to the agency as shown in the abstract of quotations as Mr. Curato has undue influence over other bidders being an officer of NCIP Caraga in which he transacted business thereon.



Management further commented during the exit conference that as soon as they received the AOM, the transaction for van rental with Mr. Curato had been stopped in compliance with the law.





Presence of conflict of interest between the winning bidder and the procuring entity



22.	Payments for catering services and other supplies during meetings, trainings, and other activities of NCIP RO XIII in the total amount of P985,603.50 were procured from the cooperative of its employees, posing a conflict of interest and undue advantage to other bidders as viewed in GPPB Non-Policy Matter (NPM) opinion No. 142-2014 dated December 10, 2014, thus, restricted under its Circular No. 08-2017 dated July 31, 2017.



GPPB NPM No. 142-2014 stated that:



In general, government employees’ cooperatives are allowed to participate in the procurement opportunities of government subject to compliance with the eligibility criteria and the technical and financial requirements set by the Procuring Entity (PE). 



However, by way of exception, the Government Procurement Policy Board, in several meetings on the matter, is of the view that employees’ cooperatives should be disqualified from participating in the procurement within their agencies as it poses undue advantage in terms of access to information, which are generally not available to outside bidders. The position of the Board is anchored on the provisions of the Generic Procurement Manual (GPM) and the Philippine Bidding Documents (PBDs), which considers the existence of general conflict of interest if a bidder has a relationship, directly or through third parties, that puts them is a position to have access to information about or influence on the bid of another bidder or influence the decisions of the PE regarding the bidding process.



It further stated that the presence of conflict of interest on the part of the government employee’s cooperative doing business with the government shall be determined based on the surrounding circumstances, such as when a public official or employee who is involved in the procurement process is at the same time a board member, officer or substantial owner of that cooperative.



It was ruled in Item 5.5 of GPPB Circular 08-2017 that, accordingly, government employees’ cooperatives participation in government procurement, especially within their own respective agencies, is restricted by reason of presence of conflict of interest, which shall be determined by the BAC of the Procuring Entity taking into consideration the surrounding circumstances and applying the relevant provisions of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA 9184, the PBDs, RA 6713 and other applicable rules.



Examination of random sample disbursement vouchers submitted as of              July 30, 2020, for CY 2019 transactions disclosed that NCIP RO No. XIII procured catering services, cell cards, rice, and mineral water for a total amount of P985,603.50 from its own employees’ cooperative through the Shopping method of procurement. In this method, the Procuring Entity has the option to select which suppliers they will invite to submit proposals/quotations in addition to, or including those, that would respond to the advertisement posted on PhilGEPS and the website of the agency if any.



We found out that the Supply Officer, who also acts as the BAC Secretariat and a member of the Inspectorate Team, is at the same time the Coop Treasurer as indicated in the Coop’s Billing Statement. As Supply Officer, she signed the Request for Quotations (RFQs) to be given to three (3) prospective suppliers and the Inspection and Acceptance Report. As Coop Treasurer/Officer, she signed and submitted the Cooperative’s RFQ to NCIP, entered into a contract with NCIP RO XIII by signing the “Conforme by supplier” portion of the Purchase Order (PO), issued Billing Statement, issued Official Receipt, and affixed her signature in the “Receipt Payment” portion of the Disbursement Voucher. The number of times the Supply Officer affixed her signature in documents in various capacities is tallied in table below.



No. of Transactions

No. of times the Supply Officer Affixed Her Signature in Documents in Various Capacities



PR

as Requisitioner

PO

in

"Conforme of Supplier" Portion

IAR

"Acceptance" Portion

DV "Receipt of Payment" Portion

Three (3) RFQs as Supply Officer

NANCIPECO RFQ as Supplier

NANCIPECO

Billing Statement

as Coop Treasurer

NANCIPECO

Official Receipt (OR)

66

7

61

60

63

32

36

55

66



Conflict of interest and undue advantage in terms of access to information which were not available to outside bidders were clearly manifested in the above-mentioned set up in view of GPPB NPM No. 142-2014, since the Supply Officer was involved in the procurement process and had access to all information and at the same time submitted RFQs and enters into a contract with the Agency in behalf of the cooperative in her capacity as Coop Treasurer. In fact, it was further observed that all of the quotations submitted by the cooperative were exactly equal to the unit cost indicated in the Purchase Request.



The Bids and Awards Committee should carefully evaluate before recommending for award to a certain supplier and adhere to the provisions of GPPB Circular No. 08-2017 to restrict the Agency employees’ coop in participating in all its procurement in order to avoid conflict of interest and undue advantage in terms of access to information with respect to other bidders.



On the other hand, it was also observed that some of the transactions lack some supporting documents, such as approved activity designs, and the IAR was not properly accomplished as the date inspected and accepted were not indicated therein. Section 4.6 of PD 1445 provides the fundamental principles governing the financial transactions and operation of any government agency, which includes, among others, that “Claims against government funds shall be supported with complete documentation.”



	Therefore, complete documentation must be submitted, and forms/reports should be properly accomplished in order to ascertain the propriety and regularity of the transaction.



We recommended that Management:



a)	Require the BAC to refrain from transacting with the Agency’s own employees’ cooperative to adhere to the provisions of GPPB Circular          No. 08-2014 to avoid conflict of interest; and



b)	Require the Accountant and other officers concerned to submit all the lacking supporting documents to the disbursement vouchers indicated in this report.



Management Comment



The following are the management reply, which we received on December 28, 2020, and stated that:



	Here, the NCIP activities involved the conduct of the training and seminars have done mostly, if not always, in the far-flung areas in the ancestral domains, which other suppliers find it a losing enterprise, unless they have to jack-up their prices to cover the costs. The NCIP cooperative is the most practical alternative, being that since some of its members will be assisting the training/seminars themselves, they could also help do the services on the ground, themselves. Consequently, the overhead cost for labor and transaction is greatly reduced, resulting in much lower catering cost, which is advantageous to the government. Nevertheless, considering that this instant action by the NCIP is considered in violation of the rules per COA AOM, the NCIP undertakes not to do it again under the same situation in the future.



Auditor’s Rejoinder



It is our opinion that procurement from the cooperative of its employees is not advantageous to the government, considering it poses a conflict of interest and undue advantage in terms of access to information that was not available to outside bidders. Also, to ensure that all bids shall be evaluated on equal footing, all taxes itemized by non-cooperatives in their bids and in which cooperatives are exempt from shall be added to the bids of cooperatives strictly for purposes of evaluation and comparison, in accordance with item 3.3 of GPPB Circular 02-2010 dated November 24, 2010, that management failed to consider and evaluate.

	 		

Much of the transactions pertained to payment of cell cards, mineral water, rice, and a token totaling P275,423.50 are all available in various establishments in Butuan City, Goods Procured from the Agency’s Cooperative were itemized in the table below.



Particulars

 Amount (P)

Cellcards

     205,800.00 

Mineral Water

         4,775.00 

Sacks of rice

       59,850.00 

Tokens

         4,998.50 

Sub-total  

      275,423.50 

Meals & Snacks:

     710,180.00 

Total Expenses

     985,603.50 



Except for the rice, cell cards, mineral water, and a token are, in fact, not available in far-flung areas, as alleged. Those goods need not necessarily be delivered at the doorstep of the location of the activity/training as the employees in-charged in the conduct of training could have brought with them those items. Besides, the employees’ cooperative is not as well capacitated to deliver all the goods in far-flung areas having no vehicle of its own.



On the meals and snacks totaling P710,180.00, the location of the training/ seminars conducted and its corresponding expenses are indicated in the table below.



Particulars

 Amount (P)

   NCIP RO XIII

     145,980.00 

   Within Butuan City

       10,000.00 

   Within ADN

     138,000.00 

   Within ADS

       75,100.00 

   Within SDS

     328,100.00 

   Within SDN

       13,000.00 

Total

     710,180.00 



Obviously, much of the training and seminars conducted were not deemed as far-flung areas. In fact, some of the seminars/training was conducted in the regional office of NCIP Caraga, within Butuan City and Agusan del Norte, as disclosed in the preceding table, in which meals and snacks could have been done by various caterers within the locality instead of the employees cooperative, to avoid conflict of interest.



We appreciate the management who undertakes not to do it again under the same situation in the future. On recommendation no. 2 requiring the Accountant and other officers concerned to submit all the lacking supporting documents that were not yet submitted to the Audit Team, management during the virtual exit conference assured to submit the lacking supporting documents to the Audit Team.





Weak Internal Control



23.	The controls placed over the cash disbursement system of NCIP RO XIII are weak due to non-segregation of incompatible functions, non-stamping of paid on the disbursement voucher and all its supporting documents, and laxity in the authorization controls in their electronic banking facilities, which resulted in the double/excess payments totaling P164,675.77; thus, agency funds are not properly safeguarded against unwarranted risks of possible loss or misuse.



Internal control is the plan of organization and all the coordinate methods and measures adopted within the organization or agency to safeguard its assets, check the accuracy and reliability of its accounting data, and encourage adherence to prescribed managerial policies, as defined in Section 123 of Presidential Decree 1445.  



While Section 124 of Presidential Decree (PD) 1445 provides that it shall be the direct responsibility of the agency head to install, implement, and monitor a sound system of internal control.



A fundamental element of internal control is the segregation of certain key duties to ensure check and balance. In general, the principal incompatible duties to be segregated are:



--		Custody of assets.

--	Authorization or approval of related transactions affecting those assets.

--	Recording or reporting of related transactions.



One of the modes utilized by NCIP RO XIII in the disbursement of government funds is through Advice to Debit the Account (ADA). Under this payment scheme, disbursements of the agency are made through the following:



1)	List of Due and Demandable Accounts Payable-Advice to Debit Account (LDDAP-ADA) 

2)	Electronic Modified Disbursement System (eMDS)



The LDDAP-ADA is an accountable form used as an authorization issued by the NGA/OU to the Modified Disbursement System, Government Servicing Bank (MDS-GSB), instructing the bank to debit a specified amount from its available NCA to pay the creditors/payees listed in the upper portion of the LDDAP-ADA.



The updated guidelines in the processing of ADA is provided under Item 4.1 of DBM Circular Letter No. 2018-14 dated December 28, 2018, which shall be streamlined as follows:



 4.1.1 NGAs/OUs shall use the existing List of Due and Demandable Accounts Payable - Advice to Debit Account (LDDAP-ADA) and the Summary of LLDAP-ADAs Issued and Invalidated ADA Entries (SLIIE) forms, xxx, to be prepared by the Accounting Division, Certified Correct by the Chief Accountant/Head of Accounting. These documents shall be approved by the Cashier or the Agency Head or his/her authorized signatories, similar to the signatories of the MDS checks (consistent with the GAM) - Sec. 56. Procedures for Disbursements through LDDAPADA).



The duly accomplished copies of the SLIIAE and LDDAP-ADA are submitted to the MDS-GSB, which shall pay the creditors/payees listed in the LDDAP-ADA not later than 48 hours but not earlier than 24 hours upon receipt of the said document from the NGA and OUs.



As part of the implementation of the Modified Disbursement Scheme (MDS), NCIP RO XIII also adopts the LBP electronic Modified Disbursement System (eMDS) as one of its modes of disbursement. The eMDS is a secured internet banking facility developed for LBP's NGAs clients that allow them to do selected MDS transactions online such as the transmission of Advice of Checks Issued and Cancelled (ACIC), processing of payment of accounts payable to creditors/payees, transfer of fund allocation and viewing the MDS cash balance. Only the enrolled maker(s) and authorizer(s) can transact in the eMDS.



The eMDS transactions initiated and approved by the government agency are processed in real-time by the system. Thru eMDS, the government agency shall no longer submit the hardcopy of the documents to the MDS-GSB as previously required in the Modified Disbursement System (MDS). The required MDS reports will be immediately available to the Bureau of the Treasury (BTr) and concerned government agencies.



Verification of the financial reports of the Accounting Unit and the monthly reports submitted/e-mailed by the Cashier disclosed that there were eight disbursements for the payments of RATA, salary increment, terminal leave benefits, traveling expenses, payment to supplier, and job orders totaling P164,675.77 in August to December 2020 which were paid twice due to non-stamping of paid to disbursement vouchers and all its supporting documents. Further, tax remittance for CY 2016 in the amount of P3,548.00 was also remitted twice.



The above-mentioned double payments were recorded in the General Journal as receivables. Partial recoveries were already made by the payees and duly remitted to the Bureau of Treasury (BTr), leaving an outstanding receivable of P158,388.27 as of December 31, 2020.  



Transactions for the payment of various maintenance and other operating expenses totaling P283,263.14 were almost paid twice also had it not been issued with Advice of Checks Issued and Cancelled (ACIC) due to the issuance of two (2) LDDAP-ADA dated June 15 and 25, 2020 (Appendix M).



In our inquiry with the Accountant and Acting Cashier who was only designated in CY 2020, the double issuance of LDDAP-ADA totaling P283,263.14 occurred because the original LDDAP-ADA dated June 15, 2020, prepared and submitted to LBP-Butuan for the said transaction was allegedly not received by the bank employee. For this reason, the Acting Cashier prepared and submitted another LDDAP-ADA dated June 25, 2020, covering the same set of DVs and supporting documents with the previous ADA. However, both LDDAP-ADAs were actually processed by the bank, hence the double issuance.  



We were informed that although payment was not credited to the account of the payees listed in the second LDDAP-ADA dated June 25, 2020, the amount of P283,263.14 remained an outstanding check/ADA in the bank statement as it was sourced from the funds for the second quarter of CY 2020 which cannot be reverted back to the book balance in July 2020 due to automatic lapsing of unused cash on the last working day of June 2020. Once it becomes stale, the total amount will be reverted to the BTr.



The Acting Cashier further explained that the rest of the double payments happened during months with scheduled reversions of unused cash to the BTr wherein the transactions to be processed are voluminous partly due to the delayed submission of vouchers by agency employees thus, she was not able to properly check the entries she encoded in the LDDAP-ADA with the supporting documents. She informed the audit team that to date, the remaining double/excess payments were recovered, and the same was remitted to the BTr. Likewise, DVs and supporting documents are now stamped “paid” upon payment to prevent similar situations from recurring.



While we commend the efforts of the agency to address the matter regarding double/excess payments, our assessment of the control measures of NCIP RO XIII pertaining to its Cash Disbursement System showed several weaknesses that need to be improved to address the issue properly. We noted that the employee who prepares the LDDAP-ADA is the Acting Cashier rather than a designated employee of the Accounting Unit, contrary to the requirements of DBM Circular Letter No. 2018-14. Moreover, the agency has not developed an effective monitoring system on the LDDAP-ADAs prepared and submitted to the Government Servicing Bank; thus, it contributed to the incurrence of double payments/issuances.



We likewise performed a walk-through of the eMDS process of NCIP RO XIII and noted that even though the Acting Cashier serves as the maker of the electronic transactions, she was not enrolled as maker per bank records. Verification showed that the account she used to log-in as a maker is that of the former Cashier. Based on the generated report of the eMDS, the enrolled maker and authorizers of the agency are the following:



Maker

Authorizer

	1)	Neah Liza A. Java – former Cashier, currently designated as Budget Officer

    

Any of the following:



	1)	Owen M. Ducena-resigned



	2)	Atty. John Edwin C. Luneta-resigned



	3)	Eleanor C. Galimpin-former Acting Chief, Admin and Finance, still connected with the agency



	4)	Atty. Jose Dumagan Jr.-resigned



	5)	Atty. Leslie Mae F. Plaza, current head of TMSD



As shown in the table on the last page, the employee enrolled as the maker was already designated as Budget Officer, while the personnel registered as authorizers were not yet updated as three of them are no longer connected with the agency.



Further observation of the agency's electronic banking process revealed that aside from being the maker of eMDS transactions, the Acting Cashier also has access to the account of one of the authorizers; thus, in actuality, she further performs the authorizing function of transactions she initiated. In effect, the Acting Cashier does not only perform custodial function of government funds being the Disbursing Officer, she was also authorized to approve the electronic cash transactions of the agency, which duties and functions should have been assigned to separate individuals to ensure check and balance.



According to the Acting Cashier, once a print-out is generated for a completed eMDS transaction, she just replaces the names indicated in the prepared by (maker) and certified correct/approved by (authorizer) portions for her signature and that of the incumbent Chief of Admin and Finance who also do not have an eMDS account.



Upon further inquiry, the Acting Cashier also disclosed that in addition to the maker in the table above, the former cashiers of the agency have also separate eMDS accounts used to transact with the internet banking facility. She has no knowledge of their passwords and is unaware whether the accounts have been closed. They have already requested LBP to update the list of maker and authorizers of the agency but as of the moment, no changes were made despite their verbal follow-ups. With this, the security of the agency’s eMDS account may be compromised making it susceptible to unauthorized access.



The above practices on the agency's cash disbursement system do not sit well with the principles of sound internal control as it enables one person to perform two incompatible functions, thus resulting in less supervision over financial transactions and lack of segregation of crucial functions. Moreover, due to the existing control weaknesses, the agency incurred double/excess payments totaling P164,675.77, which could have utilized to fund priority programs, projects, and activities given the scarcity of government resources. Coupled with inadequate controls over its eMDS, the agency's funds are not properly safeguarded and further exposed to unwarranted risks of possible loss or misuse.



We recommended that Management:



a. designates an employee from the Accounting Unit tasked to prepare LDDAP-ADA and SLIIE covering approved DVs and supporting documents, pursuant to DBM Circular Letter No. 2018-14;



b. requires the Acting Cashier and the Accounting Unit to maintain a logbook on the receipt and release of the LDDAP-ADA and its supporting documents for control purposes to ensure that the documents of the agency will be appropriately safeguarded against possible loss;



c)	make a written follow-up to the Government Servicing Bank relative to the change of maker and authorizers of the agency for the eMDS and verify whether past accounts of former employees on the electronic banking facility were closed/disabled; and 



d)	establish guidelines on the use of eMDS to ensure that necessary steps are taken to address and monitor the control weaknesses identified, taking into consideration the adequate segregation of duties, proper authorization controls, and access privileges, among others.







Management Comment



During the virtual exit conference, the cashier explained that such practice being the maker, and at the same time, the authorizer exists for a quite number of years. She just followed the previous cashiers' practice thinking that such action is just a normal one. Management assured to address the issue properly and further stated to follow-up to the Government Servicing Bank relative to the change of maker and authorizers of the agency for the eMDS and verify whether past accounts of former employees on the electronic banking facility were closed/disabled.





Gender and Development (GAD)



24.	The NCIP CO and ROs I, III, IV, IX and XII failed to prepare/submit plans and programs intended to address gender issues, contrary to Section 31 of the GP of the GAA of FY 2020 (RA No. 11465).



Section 31 of the GP of the GAA of FY 2020 (RA No. 11465) states that all agencies of the government shall formulate a GAD Plan designed to address gender issues within their concerned sectors or mandate and xxx. The GAD Plan shall be integrated in the regular activities of the agencies, which shall be at least five percent (5%) of their budgets.



Section 4.4 of the PCW-NEDA-DBM Joint Circular No. 2012-01 provides that the agency shall develop or integrate in its existing database GAD information to include gender statistics and sex-disaggregated data that have been systematically produced or gathered as inputs or bases for planning, budgeting, programming, and policy formulation.



Item No. 1.3.6 of PCW Memorandum Circular No. 2017-03 also provides that concerned agencies shall print the final GAD Accomplishment Report for signature of their agency head and submit signed copies to PCW and their respective COA Audit Team according to the schedules set under PCW-DBM-NEDA JC 2012-01 and COA Circular 2014-001, respectively.



While item V of COA Circular No. 2014-001 dated March 18, 2014 requires that the Audited agency to submit a copy of the Annual GAD Plan and Budget (GPB) to the Audit Team assigned to the agency within five (5) working days from the receipt of the approved plan from the PCW or their mother or central offices, as the case maybe.  Likewise, a copy of the corresponding Accomplishment Report shall be furnished the said Audit Team within five (5) working days from the end of January of the preceding year.



We recommended that:



a.  NCIP CO and ROs I, III, IV, IX and XII GAD focal point to:



i.	submits GAD Plan and Budget and Accomplishment Report to PCW for review and approval as required;



ii.	submit to the Audit Team Accomplishment Report and approved GAD Plan and Budget reviewed by the PCW;



b. responsible officials of RO I to Direct the concerned GAD focal person to submit the Approved Annual GPB for CY 2020 and the corresponding AR as of December 31, 2020 to the Audit Team.



Management Comment:



RO 1:

On February 15, 2021, the copy of the GPB for CY 2020 and the corresponding AR as of December 31, 2020 were submitted to the Audit Team. 



As per verification, the agency had allocated budget of P5,685,750.00 and P100,000.00 for client-focused and organization-focused activities, respectively or a total amount of P5,785,750.00 for GAD activities. Of these amount the agency had attributed cost of P4,844,925.00 and P15,963.14 for client-focused and organization-focused activities, respectively or a total amount of P4,860,88.14. The attributed cost on the AR of the agency represents more than 84 per cent of the total allocated GAD budget for CY 2020. 



	Further, the Audit Team recommended that management should continue to implement GAD activities through their projects and programs especially those that are client-focused in nature and to meet 100 per cent attribution of cost on the AR of GAD related activities in relation to its allocated budget.





Senior Citizens and PWDs, and Youth



25.	NCIP CO, ROs III, V, X and XII failed to formulated and implemented plans and programs intended to address issues, and concerns of Senior Citizens and PWDs, in compliance with Sections 32 of the GP of the GAA of FY 2020 (RA No. 11465).



The following GPs of the GAA, FY 2020 state that:

 

Section 33. Programs and Projects Related to Senior Citizens and Persons with Disability. All agencies of the government shall formulate plans, programs and projects intended to address the concerns of senior citizens and persons with disability, insofar as it relates to their mandated functions, and integrate the same in their regular activities.



	Section 34. Projects Related to the Youth. All agencies of the government, including government owned and controlled corporations shall provide allocations for youth development projects and activities, which shall include government internship opportunities, within the framework of the Philippine Development Plan (2017-2022).	

	

We recommended that Management should give importance to the development of programs to address the concerns of senior citizens and persons with disability through formulation and implementation of plans, projects and programs to address the concerns of the SCs and PWDs and activities related to Youth in compliance with Section 32 and 33 of the General Provision of the FY 2020 GAA.





Disaster Risk Reduction and Management (DRRM) and Climate Change Mitigation



26.	The NCIP-CO failed to formulate and implement plans and programs intended for mainstreaming of disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation and mitigation in all agency program and projects, contrary to Section 36 of the GP of the GAA, FY 2020, thus, depriving the target beneficiaries of the benefits that maybe derived therefrom.



The following GP of the GAA, FY 2020 state that: 



Section 36.  Mainstreaming of Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation in All Agency Programs and Projects. All agencies of the government shall plan and implement programs and projects, taking into consideration measures for climate change adaptation and mitigation, and disaster risk redaction, based on climate and disaster risk assessments. National government agencies shall report their climate actions to the Climate Change Commission (CCC) for monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the National Climate Change Action Plan.



To ensure that the disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation measures are appropriate in the light of intensifying hazards, all national government projects should be subjected to multi-scenario, probabilistic analysis. For this purpose, the CCC shall extend the necessary technical and capacity building assistance to all agencies of the government in the conduct of risk assessment, as well as adaptation and litigation planning.



All agencies shall undertake efforts to integrate environmental sustainability in their daily activities, system, processes, and operations, and accelerate the greening of their organizational culture and behavior towards reducing their carbon footprint, through saving on paper and printing, minimizing the use of plastic and food waste, switching to renewable energy, reducing energy and water consumption, holding meetings online, and reducing travel emissions. 



In addition to the above-cited GAA provision for Mainstreaming of Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation in All Agency Programs and Projects, Section 5.1 of the CCC-DBM Joint Memorandum Circular No. 2013-01 dated December 27, 2013 provides that Departments, Agencies, Bureaus, Offices, Commissions, State Universities and Colleges, Other Instrumentalities of the National Government and all other concern shall identify and tag in the Online Submission of Budget Proposal (OSBP), the climate change-related expenditures shown in the Climate Change Typologies; submit to CCC and DBM the list of tagged climate change per Programs/Activities/Projects (PAPs)  during the annual submission of budget proposal as prescribed in the National Budget Call (NBC) for review/evaluation; and seek the approval of CCC for typology proposals which do not fall under the existing Climate Change Typology.



In a letter dated January 5, 2021, the Audit Team requested for the submission of the agency’s plans and programs/projects, and accomplishment reports related to disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation, but to no avail.



Our inquiry with the Budget Officer revealed that they have neither incorporated disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation and mitigation on their PAPs nor identified and tagged in the OSBP any climate change-related expenditures of the Agency.



Moreover, they have not submitted to CCC and DBM the list of tagged climate change PAPs during the annual submission of budget proposal for review/evaluation.



We recommended that Management:



a)		require the Budget Officer to identify and tag in the OSBP and submit to CCC and DBM the list of tagged climate change PAPs during the annual submission of budget proposal for review/evaluation, in accordance with CCC-DBM Joint Memorandum Circular No. 2013-01, copy furnish the Office of the Auditor;

	

b)		require the OSSESSC Director and the Budget Officer to write a justification on why the disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation and mitigation were not incorporated on their PAPs nor identified and tagged in the OSBP any climate change-related expenditures of the Agency; 



c)		direct the OSESSC Director to submit the agency’s plans and programs/projects, and accomplishment reports related to disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation; and

	

d)		direct the OSESSC Director to formulate and implement plans, programs and projects intended to mainstreaming of disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation and mitigation in all agency program and projects in NCIP CO.





Compliance with Tax Laws and Remittances to Other Regulatory Bodies



27.	The NCIP complied with the withholding and remittances of mandatory deductions and loan amortization, pursuant to the rules and regulations issued by the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR), the GSIS, PhilHealth and Pag-IBIG. For CY 2020, amount of taxes withheld and mandatory deductions and remittances to the BIR, GSIS, PhilHealth and Pag-IBIG are summarized below:



Account

Beginning Balance (P)

Withheld (P)

Remittance (P)

Ending Balance (P)

Due to BIR

2,055,320.75 

 56,472,436.35 

 57,086,929.14 

1,440,827.96 

Due to GSIS

3,972,179.01 

 99,372,628.83 

102,303,001.27 

1,041,806.57 

Due to Pag-IBIG

 647,870.79 

 23,917,394.13 

 24,151,612.37 

 413,652.55 

Due to PhilHealth

 159,569.66 

 7,438,830.56 

 7,510,311.84 

 88,088.38 

Total

6,834,940.21 

187,201,289.87 

191,051,854.62 

2,984,375.46 





Expanded withholding tax on payments to professionals not consistently applied



28.	The expanded withholding tax on payments to professionals in RO CAR was not consistently applied in the payments of honoraria to outsourced resource persons and facilitator contrary to BIR Revenue Regulation No. 11-2018. In addition, RO V failed to withhold taxes on Job-Order (JO) Personnel during the year depriving the government of the income that could have been accrued to the National Treasury.   



The withholding of tax from government payments cannot be undermined as an effective tool in the collection of taxes as it encourages compliance and prevents delinquencies and revenue loss, among other important reasons. BIR Revenue Regulation No. 11-2018 prescribed the withholding tax rates on government money payments and honorarium of resource person, is within the category of professional taxpayers, subject to five percent withholding tax.



Professionals were outsourced by RO CAR for their expertise as resource persons and facilitators in the formulation of the ICCs/IPs’ Ancestral Domain Sustainable Development and Protection Plans (ADSDPP) in the provinces of Abra and Ifugao.



Post audit disclosed that of the five payments to three outsourced professionals in 2020, only one payment was subjected to withholding tax. The Office did not consistently comply with requirement of the BIR in the withholding of percentage tax from the payments of the honoraria in 2020 and tax was not withheld amounting to P3,534.10. 



Overall, the RO CAR remitted thru Tax Remittance Advice (TRA) a total amount of P5,634,638.01 for taxes withheld for CY 2020, the. The minimal balance of P1,119.01 	as at year end was settled in January 2021.



Paragraphs A and J of Section 2.57.2 and B (6) of Section 4 of RR No, 2-98 as amended by RR No. 11-2018 which implemented the provisions of Republic Act (R.A.) 10963 (TRAIN Law) relative to some changes in rate of Creditable Withholding Tax on certain income payments.  



Under BIR Ruling No. 8-2010, it was ruled that the performance of services by job-order personnel hired pursuant to EO no. 782 is not under employer-employee relationship in reference to DOLE-DBM Joint Circular No. 1-092 and CSC Memorandum Circular No. 38 series of 1993.  Services of job-order personnel are construed as a sale of service under Section 108 of the 1997 Tax Code as amended, imposing value added tax (VAT) on sale of services.  Tax compliance of job order personnel would then follow this classification – construed as seller and not as employee. 



Given this framework, we averred that government agencies are required to withhold income taxes on income payments made to job order personnel for the services rendered depending on their classification and the level of gross income.



Our audit of the salaries and wages account of NCIP RO V during the year disclosed that wages paid to job order personnel amounting to P623,964.24, including overtime pay, were not subjected to tax.



During the year, the agency inadvertently omitted to withhold taxes on job order personnel on the ground that each annual gross income did not exceed P250,000.00 and; thus, exempt from withholding tax. 



In such case, where income is less than P250,000.00 per annum, the income payment may be exempt from withholding tax on income upon submission of a Sworn Declaration of Gross Receipts/Sales attached as Annex B-2 of RR No. 11-2018, together with the copy of the Certificate of registration (COR) or copy of the BIR Form 1901 (duly received by the BIR), and withholding of percentage tax, if payee signified the option to avail the 8% income tax rate regime in the sworn declaration.



In the absence of the requirements mentioned above, the agency has the obligation to withhold tax of 2 % and 5% or 10% from income payment made to job order personnel, whichever is applicable and remit the same to the BIR within the prescribed period.



Therefore, in its failure to withhold tax deprived the government of the income that could have been collected from the pertinent income or business taxes due from the job order personnel. 



We recommended that:



a. RO CAR to deduct the prescribed withholding tax from all payments of honoraria to professionals outsourced by the Regional Office in compliance with BIR RR No. 11-2018;



b. Responsible personnel in RO V to withhold the applicable tax on job order personnel in accordance to individual tax classification and remit the same to the BIR within the prescribed period; and



c. RO V to require JO personnel to submit the duly accomplished BIR Form 1901 and Sworn Declaration, stamped received by the BIR, to justify non-withholding of tax from the income payment made to them.     



Management Comment



RO V:

Management, in its written reply, informed us that the Job Order personnel were now registered with the BIR and submitted a copy of the BIR Form 1901.  However, the Accountant was instructed to withhold tax to those who opt not to submit the BIR Form 1901 and Sworn Declaration.





Property Insurance Laws



29.	Insurable properties of ROs II, IV, IX and X amounting to P17,382,038.60, P8,173,346.83, P19,140,932.58 and P18,661,537.75, respectively and four motor vehicles of RO V were not insured with the Property Insurance Fund of the GSIS contrary to RA No. 656; thus, depriving the agency to be indemnified in the event of damage to or loss of such insurable assets/properties due to fire, earthquake, storm or other fortuitous events.



Sections 5 and 11 of R.A.  No. 656 provides that:



Section 5. Every government, except a municipal government below first class, is hereby required to insure its properties, with the Fund against any insurable risk herein provided and pay the premiums thereon, which, however, shall not exceed the premiums charged by private insurance companies: Provided, however, That the System reserves the right to disapprove the whole or a portion of the amount of insurance applied for: Provided, further, That such property or part thereof as may not be insurable or acceptable for insurance may be insured with any private insurance company. 



Section 11. Each government as defined herein shall include in its annual appropriation the amount necessary to cover the premiums for the insurance of its properties during each fiscal period and remit the same immediately to the System as provided in section ten hereof. 



However, review of pertinent records disclosed that the properties of ROs II, IV and X were not insured with the Property Insurance Fund of the Government Service Insurance System (PIF-GSIS).  Further, insurance for four vehicles of RO V were not renewed.



Inquiry revealed that the non-insurance of the properties was due to non-allocation of fund for the payment of the insurance premiums as the same was not included in their budget.



We recommended that Management require the:



Region

Recommendation

Management Comment

II

    Responsible officer or personnel to follow up the result of evaluation of the submitted insurable properties to the GSIS and immediately request funding therof to ensure that all insurable properites are indemnified in case unforseen events may happen.  Likewise adhere strictly to the provisions of RA No. 656, otherwise known as the Property Insurance Law.

     Management commented that GSIS advised them to submit the final listing of insurable properties in itemized format together with the forms needed to be filled up.  The Supply Officer is on the process of facilitating the documents required as advised to be submitted and hopeful that it will be approved and be included in the budget proposal as required by the IAS.

IV

     Concerned Regional Directors make personal representation with the NCIP-CO to discuss the inclusion of the payment of the computed property insurance premiums in their budget; and     

     No management comment.

V

    Responsible officer or personnel of to ensure compliance with laws, regulations and policies governing the proper and adequate registration and insurance coverage of motor vehicle to be able to avail of the GSIS Property Replacement in cases of loss or damage;

     Management, in its reply, called the attention of the concerned officials assigned with the motor cycle with expired insurance to coordinate with the Supply Officer Designate to immediately secure insurance coverage from GSIS in compliance with the Property Insurance Law.

IX

     Responsible officials to insure its insurable properties with the General Insurance Fund of the GSIS in compliance with COA Circular No. 92-390 and RA 656, as amended, specially that NCIP had fire incident. It is further recommended that Management make a strong representation with DBM thru NCIP Central Office for additional MOOE of NCIP Region IX for this purpose.

     In spite of the eagerness of the management to insure all of its insurable assets, its financial capacity cannot cope up with its demands. The Regional Office’s allotment of P3,306,000.00 for the whole year for its regular MOOE does not include allocation for insurance of its properties.  Thus, any additional expenditures would greatly affect the payment of scheduled and fixed expenses. 



     Request for additional Funds to augment payment of additional MOOEs was already done thru the NCIP Central Office. Currently, the regional office is waiting for any development of the said request. Rest assured that the insurance of the said properties with the General Insurance Fund will be prioritized if funds warrant, management added.

X

     Property and Supply Officer to submit list of insurable assets of the agency using the Property Insurance Form (PIF) to the General Insurance Fund of the GSIS as basis for the assessment of general insurance coverage;



     Responsible personnel to submit a copy of the insurance policy to the Auditor’s Office; and



     Responsible personnel to submit an explanation why the provisions of the Property Insurance Law were not complied.

     Management commented that the Supply Officer to awaits for the submission of the Inventory Report. No update on compliance was communicated or submitted.



Auditors Rejoinder

RO X:

Based on the limited available records, management had claims for the conduct of inventory taking for the year.  In fact, the RCPPE was submitted to the Audit Team, although delayed. This situation gives us the impression that the non-reconciliation between the property and accounting records was considered a priority by the management which in effect compromises the subject compliance on its insurable assets. Further, based on the Reports of Checks issued, only the payment of insurance for motor vehicles was observed in the particulars.





Status of Audit Suspension, Disallowances and Charges



30.	Total suspensions and disallowances amounting to P5,201,540.14 and P8,460,635.08, respectively, remained unsettled at year-end contrary to Section 7.1.1 of the 2009 Rules and Regulations on the Settlement of Accounts (RRSA) prescribed under COA Circular No. 2009-006 dated September 15, 2009.



Section 7.1.1 of the 2009 RRSA provides that: 



The head of the agency who is primarily responsible for all government funds and property pertaining to his agency shall ensure that:



The settlement of disallowances and charges is made within the prescribed period.



The details of the unsettled balances of Notices of Suspensions (NSs) and Disallowances (NDs) are shown below.





Offices

Beginning Balance (As of December 31, 2019) (P)

This Period (January 1 to December 31, 2020 (P)

Ending Balance (As of December 31, 2020) (P)





NS/ND/NC

NSSDC



Suspensions

    4,888,050.16 

  2,245,109.26 

    1,931,619.28 

    5,201,540.14 

CO

-

-

-

-

CAR

-

-

-

-

RO I

-

-

-

-

RO II

102,136.75

-

-

102,136.75

RO III

-

-

-

-

RO IV

	-

-

-

-

RO V

-

-

-

-

RO VI/VII

1,095,206.75

195,902.00

7,737.00

1,283,371.75

RO IX

-

-

-

-

RO X

2,905,596.91

2,049,207.26

1,866,881.28

3,087,922.89

RO XI

417,787.75

-

57,001.00

360,786.75

RO XII

-

-

-

-

RO XIII

367,322.00

-

-

367,322.00

Disallowances

 8,642,762.08 

 4,368.00 

 186,495.00 

 8,460,635.08 

CO

1,473,737.24

-

-

1,473,737.24

CAR

18,080.00

-

-

18,080.00

RO I

-

-

-

-

RO II

718,553.48

-

126,200.00

592,353.48

RO III

3,927,796.88

-

24,062.50

3,903,734.38

RO IV

-

-

-

-

RO V

-

-

-

-

RO VI/VII

17,918.04

4,368.00

2,080.00

20,206.04

RO IX

-

-

-

-

RO X

84,587.08

-

30,759.00

53,828.08

RO XI

90,785.30

-

3,393.50

87,391.80

RO XII

574,901.23 

-

-

574,901.23 

RO XIII

1,736,402.83

-

-

1,736,402.83

Total

  12,955,911.01 

  2,249,477.26 

    2,118,114.28 

  13,087,273.99 



We recommended and Management agreed to strictly enforce the settlement of the audit suspensions and disallowances pursuant to the provisions of COA Circular No. 2009-006 dated September 15, 2009.





31.  Compliance of National Task Force to End Local Communist Armed Conflict (NTF-ELCAC)



31.1 Compliance Audit on the Indigenous Peoples Right Advocacy and Monitoring Treaty Obligations (IPRAMTO) support to operations and institutionalization of the Whole of the Nation and Good Governance Approaches as Framework to End Local Communist Armed Conflict (ELCAC) CY 2019 and 2020 of Central Office.



In CY 2019, the DBM released P23,000,000.00 to NCIP for the funding requirements of the NTF-ELCAC’s Twelve (12) Line of Efforts per OP's Approval dated October 8, 2019, with details as follows:



Particulars

Amount (P)

Allotment per SARO-BMB-B-19-0017499

23,000,000.00

Obligations

20,987,258.74

Unobligated amount

2,012,741.26

Disbursements

20,486,908.07



The P2,012,741.26 unobligated amount was carried over as Continuing Appropriation in CY 2020 for the MOOE of the Task Force.



The breakdown of the funding per Region is presented below:



Regional Office

Allotment

Obligation

Disbursement

Unobligated Amount

1. Central Office (CO)

 5,094,087.35

4,532,330.54

4,525,258.67

 561,756.81

2. CAR

1,027,000.00

1,002,000.00

1,002,000.00

 25,000.00

3. Region I

1,167,597.00

1,167,597.00

1,167,597.00

-

4. Region II

1,267,000.00

1,197,374.40

1,197,374.40

69,625.60

5. Region III

1,196,000.00

1,194,304.35

1,194,304.35

1,695.00

6. Region IV A

2,676,000.00

2,086,00.00

1,626,000.00

590,000.00

7. Region V

1,037,000.00

1,037,000.00

1,037,000.20

-

8. Region VI

1,378,000.00

1,378,000.00

1,378,000.00

-

9. Region IX

1,355,000.00

1,037,821.05

1,037,821.05

317,178.95

10. Region X

2,181,620.15

2,181,620.15

2,181,620.15

-

11. Region XI

1,525,526.50

1,428,432.25

1,428,432.25

 97,094.25

12. Region XII

1,402,169.00

1,266,799.00

1,266,799.00

135,370.00

13. Region XIII

1,693,000.00

1,477,980.00

1,477,980.00

215,020.00

Total

23,000,000.00

20,987,258.74

20,486,908.07

2,012,741.26



For CY 2019, the agency reported the following accomplishments relative to the objectives of EO No. 70:



Activities

Budget

Target

Accomplishment

1)	Regional Workshop & Development of IPs Implementation Plan Interfacing EO No. 70



a)	Conduct of twelve (12) Clustered Indigenous Peoples Summit/Conferences



b)	Reproduction of IEC Materials on NTF-ELCAC and NCIP Programs and Handouts









13,643,000.00







1,505,000.00









Twelve (12) Regional Action Plans



One (1) Support Activity









Thirteen (13) Regional Action Plans



One (1) IEC Material Reproduced

2)	Strengthening NCIP – NTF structure at the regional, provincial & community service centers thru the establishment of national program management team to facilitate the gathering & consolidation of data, statistics on IP issues/contract of services

500,000.00

Ten (10) Contract of Services

Eight (8) Contract of Services Hired

3)	Program/project research, monitoring & assessment thru conduct of visitations & profiling of ancestral domains

5,100,000.00

753 Profiles of Ancestral Domains

753 Ancestral Domains Profiled

4)	Enhancement of policy for enhanced IMPRAMTO program thru the conduct of assessment, information gathering in relation to international IP issues

2,092,000.00

One (1) Activity Coordination and Collaboration

One (1) Activity Conducted on Coordination and Collaboration

5)	Capacity building – Trainor’s training on ethnicity concepts & definitions

160,000.00

22 Trained Participants

22 Trainees

Total

23,000,000.00









In the NCIP CO, the agency incurred actual expenses of P4,152,168.92 as of December 31, 2019.  Review and examination of documents showed the following deficiencies;                                                                                                                                     



Accounts

Particulars

Amount (P)

Observations

Due from NGAs

Advance payment for the Fare Agreement in the PSDBM for the official use of NCIP NTF-ELCAC.

1,000,000.00

None.

Travelling Expenses (Foreign)

Travel to Rome, France and Geneva of two Commissioners, one Regional Director and one Division Chief as member of the Philippine delegation to participate in the Forum on Business and Human Rights, engage non-government organization and people’s organizations and widen international network and linkages of government.

1,668,544.40

None

Other MOOE

Printing of Annual Report of NCIP and NTF-ELCAC printed materials for dissemination.

570,820.00

None

Other Professional Services

NCIP executed a resolution for the additional eight (8) personnel assigned to different division in support to NTF-ELCAC

319,427.52

None

Travelling Expenses (Local)

Travel reimbursement of various officers and employees of NCIP to the different regions in support for the NTF-ELCAC campaign.

294,031.00

None                                 

Semi-Expendable ICT

Procurement of ten (10) laptops and computers accessories for NTF-ELCAC use.

155,685.00

None

Semi-Expendable – Communication Equipment

Procurement of ten (10) cellphones for NTF-ELCAC use.

49,990.00



Representation Expense

Payment of venue, food & accommodation – Re Trainor’s Training on Ethnicity

67,070.00

The Training was conducted outside the office due to the fire incident that occurred in the agency office  in 2019 where the function room was the most affected.

Fuel, Oil & Lubricant

Payment of fuel consumption during the transfer of office documents and properties to the new rented building.

13,800.00

None.



Office Supplies Expense

Procurement of various supplies used under the NTF-ELCAC.

10,540.00

None.

Training Expenses

Payment of various expenses during the conduct of Trainor’s training.

2,261.00

None

Total



4,152,168.92





For the expenditures in the Regions, the audit team requested the NCIP Regional Auditors thru e-mail on September 27, 2020 to submit the result on their audit on the utilization of the funds allocated to each Region.  However, only the Regional Auditors in CAR, II, III, and V submitted their report, with deficiencies as presented below:

Regional Office

Transactions

Amount  (P)

Deficiencies 

CAR

No deficiency noted

RO II

No deficiency noted

RO III

Cash advance for NTF-ELCAC of Rosalia P. Lopez & Janna Grace B. Comising for payment of Travel expense, Representation expense and Office supplies totaling P447,000.00.  

447,000.00

Liquidation reports for cash advances of P447,000.00 were not submitted to the Audit Team.                                   



Payment for the lease of venue for the NCIP Action Planning Workshop

248,000.00

1)	No statement of account;                                                        

2)	No office order for the participants

RO V

No deficiency noted

TOTAL

695,000.00







For CY 2020 the sources and utilization of funds of IPRAMTO support to NTF-ELCAC from January 1 to November 30, 2020 are presented below:



Source of Funds

Date

Allotments

Obligations

Disbursement

Unobligated Allotment

Continuing Appropriations

11/30/20

2,012,741.26

893,832.11

893,832.11

1,118,909.15

IP Rights Protection Program (CY 2020)

11/30/20

14,000,000.00

10,471,490.81

9,268,878.54

3,528,509.19

Total



16,012,741.26

11,365,322.92

10,162,710.65

4,647,418.34





The details of the Allotments, Obligations and Disbursements of the NCIP Central Office (CO) and Regional Offices (ROs) are as follows:





Regional Office

Allotment       

Obligation    

Disbursement

Unobligated Allotment

1. CO

3,930,537.29

3,709,135.52

2,745,482.35

221,401.77

2. CAR

556,108.02

537,169.56

537,169.56

18,938.46

3. Region I

282,052.41

258,616.91

256,304.11

23,435.50

4. Region II

839,489.23

463,848.61

463,848.61

375,640.62

5. Region III

389,114.75

387,419.10

387,419.10

1,695.65

6. Region IV A

1,502,327.12

679,011.22

679,011.22

823,315.90

7. Region V

177,885.72

139,488.92

139,488.92

38,396.80

8. Region VI/VII

386,219.10

386,219.10

386,219.10

-

9. Region IX

901,953.59

529,075.00

529,075.00

378,878.59

10. Region X

2,709,563.56

1,184,974.35

964,538.05

1,524,589.21

11. Region XI

1,085,557.81

1,064,603.60

1,048,393.60

20,954.21

12. Region XII

1,067,922.48

715,520.20

715,520.20

352,402.28

13. Region XIII

2,184,010.18

1,310,240.83

1,310,240.83

873,769.35

Total

16,012,741.26

11,365,322.92

10,162,710.65

4,647,418.34





For CY 2020, IPRAMTO reported the following accomplishments and CO expenditures in relation to its activities and programs in its 2nd year support to the implementation of EO No. 70:



Activities

Budget

Physical

CO





Target

Accomplishment

Obligation

Disbursement

1. Support to the National Plan ELCAC/Line of Efforts (LOEs)

1a. Program/ project research, monitoring & assessment support to EPANAW (journey) Project, Printing of IP rights materials & coffee table book & assessment, consolidation & reproduction of annual report







5,050,001.10







1







1







50,000.00







-

1b. Strengthening NCIP – NTF structure at the central and field/contract services for ELCAC concerns.





1,693,116.00





1





1





1,693,115.40





1,150,328.44



2. Support to Quick Response Mechanism / IP rights violations

2a. Review validation & monitoring of IP rights complaints through the conduct of Inter-agency Ancestral Domains Visitations on Mindanao.







3,961,417.00







1







1







109,142.00







105,000.00

2b. Dialogue for healing and reconciliation.

1,270,760.00

1

1

-

-

3. Building networks responsive mechanism & enhancing capacity of partners thru the following:

3a. Interface participation and representation of IPs in quick response mechanism & ELCAC Regional Task Forces (establishment of focal point  systems involving all the Regional, Provincial Community Service Center as well as the IPs in all level of Peace and Order as well as the Development Council)











-











1











1











-











-

3b. Institutionalization of whole of nation approach & good governance approach thru IP mandatory representation documentation of critical and good practices as well as Conduct of IP Youth Assembly and Empowerment









2,024,706.00











1









1









-









-

3c. Inter-agency and organizational collaboration & coordination of IP human rights issues thru IP international relations 





-





1





1





-





-

Subtotal

14,000,000.00

7

7

1,852,257.40

1,255,328.44



As of November 30, 2020, IPRAMTO reported 100 percent accomplishment of its 7 targets, in its 2nd year support to the implementation of EO No. 70, as follows:



1

Support to the National Plan ELCAC/LOEs



1.a

Program/project research, monitoring & assessment support to EPANAW Project, Printing of IP rights materials & coffee table book & assessment, consolidation & reproduction of annual report



1.b

Strengthening NCIP – NTF structure at the central and field/contract services for ELCAC concerns.

2

Support to Quick Response Mechanism / IP rights violations



2.a

Review validation & monitoring of IP rights complaints through the conduct of Inter-Agency Ancestral Domains Visitations on Mindanao.



2.b

Dialogue for healing and reconciliation.

3

Building networks responsive mechanism & enhancing capacity of partners thru the following:



3.a

Interface participation and representation of IPs in quick response mechanism & ELCAC Regional Task Forces (establishment of focal point  systems involving all the Regional, Provincial Community Service Center as well as the IPs in all level of Peace and Order as well as the Development Council)



3.b

Institutionalization of whole of nation approach & good governance approach thru IP mandatory representation documentation of critical and good practices as well as Conduct of IP Youth Assembly and Empowerment



3.c

Inter-agency and organizational collaboration & coordination of IP human rights issues thru IP international relations 



Verifications of DVs and other supporting documents showed that out of the total obligations of P3,709,135.52, the NCIP CO incurred actual expenses of P2,745,482.35 as of November 30, 2020, as summarized below:



Accounts

Amount

Particulars

Audit Remarks

Travelling Expenses (Foreign)

83,435.08

Travel reimbursement of Ms. Dahlialyn Cawed (Division Chief of the Office of Empowerment & Human Rights) from Thailand

None

Other Professional Services

1,745,813.42

Payment of 2 Consultants, 1 Executive Assistant, 1 Creative Art Specialist IV, 1 Public Relations Officer V

None

Other MOOE

37,938.00

Payment of taxes, licenses, Maintenance, Sanitary, mobile load expenses

None

Representation Expense

198,376.65

Payment of venue, food & accommodation for National Management Conference I

None

Fuel, Oil & Lubricant

26,250.00

Payment of fuels consumption

None

Office Supplies Expense

55,000.00

Procurement of various petty office supplies

None

Other Supplies and Materials for Distribution

464,607.00

Printing of Annual Accomplishment Report

None

Transportation and Delivery Expense

134,062.20

Freight charges of shipments of annual audit report to Regions

None

Total

2,745,482.35







Most of the expenditures of NCIP CO were in support to (1.b) “Strengthening NCIP – NTF structure at the central and field/contract services for ELCAC concerns” and (2.a) “Review validation & monitoring of IP rights complaints through the conduct of Inter-Agency Ancestral Domains Visitations on Mindanao”.



31.2 However, meals and accommodations of NCIP RO XIII amounting to P1,064,219.06 for NTF-ELCAC Regional Action Planning Workshop were not duly supported with sufficient and complete documentation as required in Section 4.6 of PD 1445 and COA Circular No. 2012-001; thus, casting doubts on the propriety and regularity of the transaction. Moreover, the procurement was not done through a competitive Public Bidding inconsistent with the provisions of RA 9184 and its Revised IRR.





       Section 4.6 of PD 1445 provides the fundamental principles governing the financial transactions and operation of any government agency, which includes among others that “Claims against government funds shall be supported with complete documentation.”



Moreover, COA Circular 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012 prescribes for the general requirements for all types of disbursements and one of which is the need to establish sufficient and relevant documents to establish the validity of claim.



On the other hand, Section 10, Article IV of RA 9184 states that all Procurement shall be done through Competitive Bidding, except as provided for in Article XVI of the said Act which pertains to the alternative modes of procurement.



Rule XVI, Section 48.2 of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA 9184 specifies that in accordance with Section 10 of this IRR, as a general rule, the Procuring Entities shall adopt competitive bidding as the general method of procurement and shall see to it that the procurement program allows sufficient lead time for such competitive bidding. Alternative methods of procurement shall be resorted to only in highly exceptional cases provided for in this Rule.



Furthermore, as provided in Item V. C of Annex H of the said IRR, the alternative mode of procurement through Shopping shall be employed in any of the following cases:



a)	When there is an unforeseen contingency requiring immediate purchase, the amount shall not exceed Two Hundred Thousand Pesos (P200,000.00) for NGAs, GOCCs, GFIs, SUCs, and Autonomous Regional Government;



b)	Procurement of ordinary or regular office supplies and equipment not available in the DBM-PS, in the amount not to exceed One Million Pesos (P1,000,000) for NGAs, GOCCs, GFIs, SUCs, and Autonomous Regional Government. 



NCIP RO XIII conducted the NTF-ELCAC Regional Action Planning Workshop on November 21-23, 2020, at Amontay Beach Resort, Nasipit Agusan del Norte. The Agency paid a total amount of P1,064,219.06 to Amontay Beach Resort for meals and venue with hotel accommodations for the said planning workshop per DV No. 19122746. 



Examination of the DV and its supporting documents revealed that the total amount due as shown in the Amontay Beach Resort’s Statement of Account dated December 4, 2019, is P1,509,810.00, which is equivalent to the amount indicated in the Purchase Order (PO). But the total amount that was settled is only P1,135,167.00 inclusive of the withholding tax of P70,947.94. According to the Accountant, the balance of P374,643.00 was not obligated since the amount has already exceeded the allotment given by the NCIP Central Office due to the huge number of attendees of the said event. Details of the POs on the NTF-ELCAC Regional Action Planning Workshop are as follows:



Purchase Order No.

Date

Supplier

Amount (P)

PO No. 19100187

11/14/2019

Amontay Beach Resort

   799,365.00 

Unnumbered Supplemental PO 

11/14/2019

Amontay Beach Resort

710,445.00 

 

Total

 

1,509,810.00 





Moreover, the Statement of Account against Payment made were presented below.



Particulars

Amount (P)

Total Amount Due per SOA dated 12/4/2019 of Amontay

1,509,810.00 

Payment made by NCIP (Gross of Tax)

1,135,167.00 

Balance

   374,643.00 



We also noted that there was no approved Activity Design/Project Proposal or any equivalent document attached which will show the details of the said activity such as its objectives, schedule, and duration, approved budget, number of targeted participants, source of fund, among others. Inconsistent details were also noted between the number of participants counted for meals and in the number of accommodations made during the activity, as shown in red ink in table below.











Date

Total No. of Participants per  PO

Total No. of Participants per  IAR

Actual No. of Participants per Attendance Sheet









Variance



Breakfast

Lunch

Dinner





Accommodation

Breakfast

Lunch

Dinner





Accommodation







11/20/2019

0

0

26



26



0

0

26



26





35



-35



11/21/2019

300

300

300



545



300

300

300



545





693



-393



11/22/2019

500

500

500



545



500

500

500



545





650



-150



11/23/2019

500

500

500



40



500

500

500



40





539



-39



11/24/2019

40

0

0



0



40

0

0



0





47



-7





On November 21-22, 2020, the accommodations made for 545 guests were higher than the number of participants of 300 and 500, respectively, as indicated in each meal. The number of accommodations should have been equal to the number of participants indicated per meal or lower but not higher. Moreover, huge variances were noted between the number of participants in the Attendance Sheet against the number shown in the PO and IAR. These discrepancies could have been avoided had there been proper planning and execution of a duly approved Activity Design or Project Proposal at the onset of the said activity.



Further scrutiny of the Attendance Sheet disclosed that there are alterations made with the date, and there are names listed that did not bear the signatures of the participants. 



In addition, the Abstract of Bids was not signed by all of the Bids and Awards Committee (BAC) members, and approval of the Head of the Procuring Entity (HOPE) was not indicated therein. One of the BAC functions enumerated in Section 12 of RA 9184 is to recommend the award of contracts to the Head of the Procuring Entity or his duly authorized representative. It can be presumed in this transaction; the Abstract of Bids is the document used by the BAC in their recommendation of the award of contract for approval of the HOPE in the absence of a BAC Resolution. The GPPB in its Non-Policy Opinion (NPM) No. 131-2014 states that:



The Abstract of Quotations does not necessarily include the BAC"s recommendation to the HOPE relative to the award of contract. Such BAC recommendation is properly made through the issuance of a BAC Resolution. Nonetheless, the Guidelines does not prohibit nor proscribe the procuring entity from including in the Abstract of Quotations the BAC"s recommendation for award of contract in order to promote efficiency in the conduct of Shopping or Small Value Procurement. Such recommendation contained in the Abstract of Quotations must be duly signed by the members of the BAC or its duly authorized or delegated unit.



Also, we were furnished an unsigned copy of NCIP RO XIII’s Supplemental Annual Procurement Plan (APP) for FY 2019 and found out that the estimated budget for the ELCAC activity for meals and snacks was only P990,000.00.



With the foregoing deficiencies, the propriety, regularity, and validity of the transaction could not be ascertained.



On the other hand, the alternative mode of procurement of Shopping employed in this transaction is not appropriate since it did not meet the criteria enumerated in Item V. C of Annex H of 2016 Revised IRR and the disbursement of P1,064,219.06 already exceeded the threshold of P1,000,000.00. Competitive Bidding must have been employed in the said procurement instead of Shopping.



Failure to use the appropriate method of procurement is a violation of the provisions of RA 9184.



			We recommended that Management:



	a)	Require the concerned employees/officers to submit the approved Activity Design/Project Proposal, duly signed Abstract of Quotations and Supplemental Annual Procurement Plan for FY 2019 for further evaluation in audit;



	b)	Submit justification/explanation why Competitive Bidding was not used in the procurement; and



	c)	Advise the BAC to adhere to the provisions of RA 9184 and its Revised IRR in every step of the procurement process and in the determination of the appropriate mode of procurement to be employed.



Management Comment



Management stated in their reply which we received on December 28, 2020, the following:

	

Recommendations 1 and 3 are for compliance by them, which could have been either complied with already or is about to comply, which the Audit Team will evaluate.



For recommendation no. 2., Management explains/justifies why competitive bidding was not used in the procurement as summarized below:



At the onset, there was only one project/activity proposed and designed to be conducted, that is, the NCIP Region XIII, Regional Planning Workshop re: NTF-ELCAC which was calculated to cost only P799,000.00. But after all the preparation was done for the event, NCIP Region XIII received a call from the Chairman’s office with instructions that the two other activities shall be conducted simultaneously with the NTF-ELCAC Regional Action Planning Workshop. These are the (1) NCIP en banc hearing/deliberation on the CP Application of Abacus Coal Exploration and Development Corporation, and (2) Mindanao Wide Writeshop of 5 Regions on 12 Line of Efforts of EO 70.



The reasons for holding simultaneous activities in one venue are the following:



1.	To minimize expenses by reducing the number of travels and accommodation by NCIP Commissioners, bureau directors, and personnel coming from NCIP Central Office in Manila to Butuan City;



1)	The relative safety, as the minimal number of travels in Mindanao, would also spell minimal exposure to risk; and



2)	Expenses by holding it simultaneously would be lesser than holding it separately because some of the participants in one activity are the same participants in the other activities;



It is the BAC Chairman, Accountant, and the Supply Officer's humble opinion that NCIP RXIII cannot be faulted for not resorting to competitive bidding because originally, the NTF-ELCAC action planning workshop costs estimate to only P799,000.00, much below the P1,000,000.00 mark. Only when the actual NTF-ELCAC activity was conducted back to back with two other activities that costs ballooned to almost double the original. And at that time, procurement by competitive bidding not only became a remote possibility but also absurd because the simultaneous conduct of the three activities was already ongoing.



Here, NCIP RXIII, through the BAC, Accountant, and the Supply Officer, were forced by the circumstances, emergency in nature, which are not of their own making, to resort to procurements by shopping because they cannot do otherwise. The order to simultaneously hold the three events in one setting came from their superiors in the NCIP Central Office at the eleventh hour, and they were not at liberty to complain, being just peons in the NCIP hierarchy. The order being given at the last minute; only procurement by shopping is the one and only option.

Auditor’s Rejoinder



We opined that while we understand the situation of NCIP RXIII, who just followed orders from the higher authority, and granting that the amount does not exceed the threshold of P1,000,000.00 using the original amount of P799,000.00 prior to the instruction of holding the three (3) activities into one venue simultaneously, still, the alternative method of Shopping should not have been employed but rather Negotiated Procurement-Small Value Procurement (53.9) as the procurement of catering services is not deemed as readily available off-the-shelf-goods.



As defined in Letter D of Annex H of RA 9184 and its Revised IRR that Negotiated Procurement is a method of procurement of Goods, Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services, whereby the Procuring Entity directly negotiates a contract with a technically, legally and financially capable supplier, contractor or consultant in any of the nine (9) cases, wherein Small Value Procurement is the number eight (8) case under the Negotiated Procurement.



Small Value Procurement (SVP) as stated in Annex H of the same Act is the Procurement of (a) goods not covered by Shopping under Section 52 of the IRR of RA 9184, (b) infrastructure projects, and (c) consulting services, where the amount involved does not exceed the threshold of P1,000,000.00 for NGAs, GOCCs, GFIs, SUCs, and Autonomous Regional Government. Procedures under SVP were also discussed in the said Annex H of RA 9184 and its Revised IRR.



Further evaluation revealed that no PR and PO for the two other activities and the required advertisement and posting of procurement opportunity has been complied.



On the other hand, out of the allotment received for NTF-ELCAC activity totaling P1,328,000.00, only P1,261,600.00 cash allocation was received by them as presented below.



Date

NTA No.

NCA No.

Regional Account No.

Purpose

Amount(P)

11/11/19

NTA-19-11-0235

NCA-BMB-B-19-0021292

2036-9017-91

To cover release for the Support to the National Task Force to End Local Communist Armed Conflict's (NTF-ELCAC) Twelve (12) Line of Efforts per SAA BUT 018.

   950,000.00 

12/16/2019

NTA-19-12-0306

NCA-BMB-B-19-0010694

2036-9017-91

To cover release for the Support to the National Task Force to End Local Communist Armed Conflict's (NTF-ELCAC) Twelve (12) Line of Efforts per SAA BUT 023.

   311,600.00



 

Total

1,261,600.00 



The three activities were all charged to NTF-ELCAC as the agency paid the amount of P1,064,219.06, net of tax sourced from the funds as shown in the table above. While the agency simultaneously conducted the three (3) activities, the payment was sourced from one fund only, given that the other two activities were not related to NTF-ELCAC. Hence, management conducted the other two activities without a corresponding appropriation making the disbursement irregular under Section 4, paragraph 1 of PD 1445, that “No money shall be paid out of any public treasury or depository except in pursuance of an appropriation law or other specific statutory authority.”



Management further explained during the virtual exit conference that the other two (2) activities which are the (1) NCIP en banc hearing/deliberation on the CP Application of Abacus Coal Exploration and Development Corporation, and (2) Mindanao Wide Writeshop of 5 Regions on 12 Line of Efforts of EO 70 were related to NTF-ELCAC; thus, the activity was charged thereof. However, it was not included in the justification but assured to submit a supplemental one that the other two (2) activities were indeed related to NTF-ELCAC.













Utilization of Funds



32.	Out of the total allotments of P1,044,981,603.00 in CY 2020, P1,036,195,517.11 or 99.15 percent were obligated and P1,017,559,495.87 or 97.37 percent were disbursed as shown in Annex A.



				133









