

				



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

	

	

A)	Introduction

	

The National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP) was created by virtue of Republic Act (RA) No. 8371, known as the “Indigenous Peoples Rights Act (IPRA) of 1997”.

		

NCIP is the primary government agency responsible for the formulation and implementation of policies, plans and programs that recognize, protect and promote the rights and well-being of the Indigenous Cultural Communities (ICCs)/Indigenous Peoples (IPs) with due regard to their beliefs, customs traditions and Institutions. Its core programs are:

	

•	ICCs/IPs Policy Services

	•	Ancestral Lands and Domain Titling Services 

	•	Human, Economic and Environmental Development Services

	•	IP Rights Protection Services

	

The NCIP is headed by a collegial body composed of a Chairman, six Commissioners and an Executive Director, chosen from among the ICCs and IPs, all appointed by the President of the Philippines.

	

	The total personnel complement of the NCIP consists of 1,670 regular plantilla positions.  As at yearend, only 1,407 positions of the Central Office (CO) and the Regional Offices (ROs) and Provincial Offices (POs) were filled up. The Agency also hired 78 personnel under job order contract. The distribution of these personnel is summarized as follows:

	

Office

Permanent

Co-Terminus

Job Order

Total

CO

           90

25

17

  132

ROs and POs

1,292

-

61

1,353

Total

1,382

25

78

1,485

	

B)	Operational Highlights



The Agency reported physical targets and accomplishments for Calendar Year (CY) 2020, as presented below: 

Programs/Projects/Activities

Output Indicators

Physical Targets 

Accomplishments







Actual

% of Actual over Target

Ancestral Land and Domain Titling Services

--	No. of stages of CADT/CALT application completed w/in the year





54





20





37



--	No. of CADT/CALT approved w/in the year

11

3

27



--	Percentage of completion of two (2) phases of ADSDPP formulation 

90%

55%

61

Human, Socio-Economic and Ecology Development and Protection Program

--	Number of projects/activities implemented

174

182

104



--	Number of IP beneficiaries

38,356



64,010

167

IPs Rights Protection Services

--	Number of projects/activities implemented

9,893

43,847

443



--	Percentage of legal assistance extended within the prescribed timeframe

98%

238%

242



--	Percentage of cases acted upon within the prescribed timeframe

68%

83%

122



C)	Financial Highlights



The financial position, financial performance and sources and utilization of funds of NCIP for CY 2020 with corresponding figures for CY 2019, are shown below:

Particulars

Amount (P)

	

2020

2019

(Restated)

Financial Position

 Assets

301,967,914.21

324,382,859.06

 Liabilities  

105,683,910.89

119,921,702.86

 Net Assets/Equity

196,284,003.32

204,461,156.20

Financial Performance

 Revenue/Income

-

1,059,222.22

 Current Operating Expenses

1,040,830,833.06

1,114,680,261.81

 Net Financial Assistance/ Subsidy

1,033,650,732.70

1,124,757,615.87

 Gains 

915,539.85

165,452.17

 Losses

1,022,822.42

27,285.88

 Surplus/(Deficit) for the period

(7,454,064.87)

11,274,743.27

Sources and Utilization of Funds

 Appropriations

1,173,637,000.00

1,055,538,648.00

 Allotments Received

1,044,981,603.00

1,101,058,192.00

 Continuing Appropriations

7,487,113.52

7,601,976.69

 Obligations Incurred

1,036,195,517.11

1,104,244,825.62

 Disbursements

1,017,559,495.87

1,081,455,324.60

 Unobligated Allotment

16,273,199.15

4,415,343.07



The Statement of Appropriations, Allotments, Obligations, Disbursements and Balances (SAAODBs) for the period January to December 31, 2020 is shown in Annex A.



D)	Scope of Audit



The audit covered the accounts and operations of the NCIP for CY 2020. It was conducted to: a) ascertain the level of assurance that may be placed on the Management’s assertion on the financial statements; b) determine the propriety of transactions as well as extent of compliance on the applicable laws, rules and regulations; c) recommend agency improvement opportunities; and d) determine the extent of implementation of prior year’s audit recommendations. Moreover, the audit was conducted in accordance with International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAIs).



E)	Auditor’s Report on the Financial Statements



The auditor rendered an unqualified opinion on the fairness of the presentation of the financial statements.



F)	Summary of Significant Observations and Recommendations



The following are the significant audit observations and corresponding recommendations were discussed with Management officials concerned during the exit conference on May 13, 2021 details of which are discussed in the report.  Management views and comments were incorporated in the report, where appropriate:

	

1.	In RO IV, a variance of P1,846,155.88 was noted between   Cash in Bank-Local Currency Current Account (CIB-LCCA) balance of P7,846,387.20 and the bank balance of P9,692,543.08 of which reconciling items could not be identified failure of the Accountant to prepare the Bank Reconciliation Statements (BRSs) for CY 2020. While in RO III, a variance of P14,024,919.17 was noted between the General Ledger and Subsidiary Ledger of CIB-LCCA.



						We recommended that Management strengthen its monitoring mechanism that the Accountants of RO III and IV regularly prepare and reconcile financial reports, journals and ledgers to support the validity and accuracy of the CIB-LCCA.



2. 	In RO CAR, error in the accounting for the deposit of collection amounting to P230,000.00 understated the Cash in Bank-Local Currency Current Account (LCCA) account.



We recommended that the Accountant of RO CAR prepares the necessary adjusting entries to correct cash account; and accordingly to remit the amount of P230,000.00 to the Bureau of Treasury.



	3. 	Cash advances granted in 12 Regional Offices totaling P19,090,948.62 remained unliquidated as of December 31, 2020, contrary to Section 89 of Presidential Decree (PD) No. 1445.

	

	We recommended that Management require the:



							a)	Regional Accountants of ROs II, III, IV, VI/VII, IX, XI, XII, XIII and CAR to demand the immediate liquidation of all outstanding CAs, and cause the withholding of salaries of all agency personnel with unliquidated CAs;



							b)	responsible officer/personnel of RO III to ensure adherence to prescribed policies on handling cash advance particularly the liquidation thereof; 



							c)	responsible officer/personnel of RO III to ascertain the validity, reliability and completeness of supporting documents of the liquidation reports submitted by AO and submit to the Audit Team for post audit;



							d)	Regional Directors of ROs IV, IX, XII and XIII to initiate a request to write-off the dormant unliquidated balances of CAs;



							e)	responsible officer/personnel of RO IV to implement special activities and projects and grant the corresponding cash advances early in the year to obtain the expected results/benefits for the current year;



f. 	responsible officer/personnel of RO VI/VII to ensure that target implementation dates are scheduled so as to allow ample time for AOs to liquidate their CAs within the year;



g. responsible officer/personnel of ROs VI/VII to observe plans, targets and schedules reflected in the Budget Execution Documents (BEDs) for efficient spending and program implementation;



h. responsible officer/personnel of ROs VI/VII to grant cash advances in amounts equal to the expenses expected to be incurred in implementing a particular phase of the agency’s field operating expenses;



i.  responsible officer/personnel of RO IX to observe the proper procurement procedures provided in RA 9184, the government procurement law in the procurement of goods and services.



j. 	responsible officer/personnel of ROs IX and XII to evaluate the granting of cash advances for projects and other activities that would satisfy the allowable two months’ requirement per Item 4.4.2 of COA Circular No. 97-002;



k. responsible officer/personnel of ROs IX and XII to comply strictly with COA Circular No. 97-002 and 2012-001 on the grant, utilization and liquidation of cash advances;



l.  responsible officer/personnel of ROs X and XI to refrain from granting cash advance if the previous cash advance of the personnel is not yet settled or liquidated;	



m. responsible officer/personnel of ROs X and XI to ensure that a certification from the accountant that previous cash advance is settled or liquidated is to be attached to the DV of every cash advance granted;



n. RO XI Bookkeeper to maintain SLs for each AO;



o. concerned Officials of RO XI to install a control procedure in the reimbursement of travel expenses, otherwise those AOs with outstanding CAs would opt reimbursement, a form of poorly planned disbursement when frequently made, which may easily deplete the financial resources of NCIP RO XI;



p. officers and employees of RO XI to maximize the use of internet for easy communication and submission of documents and reports between NCIP RO XI and Provincial Officer, particularly on processes like the availability of the certification from the Regional Accountant on CAs;



q. concerned official of RO XIII to limit the granting of cash advances for field/activity current operating expenses to the requirements for two months as provided in Item 4.4.2 of COA Circular No. 97-002; 



r.	responsible officer/personnel of RO CAR to submit updated project and financial status report for the FBI/FPIC cash advance and submit lacking documents to support the liquidation reports and cash disbursements that are pending for submission to the Audit Team amounting to P1,376,241.54; and





4.  	The balance of inventory accounts of RO V amounting to P819,614.34 as of year-end were misstated and some accounts misclassified due to a) non-submission of Delivery Receipts/ Report of Inspection and Acceptance and RSMI to the Accounting Section; b) non-reconciliation between the accounting and property records; and c) non-compliance with the 2019 RCA.

 

We recommended that Management instruct the:



	a)	Supply Officer to submit DRs/RSMIs to the Accountant to update the SL/GL for any additions and issuances of inventory;



	b)	Supply Officer to maintain stock cards for each inventory item to keep track of the purchases and issuances;



	c)	Accountant and the Supply Officer to reconcile the balance between the subsidiary records, general ledger and inventory counts and adjust the discrepancies; and



	d)	Supply Officer and the Accountant to coordinate with each other to properly classify inventory items according to its type using the account titles in the 2019 Revised Chart of Accounts.



5.    The validity of the total Receivables balance amounting to P50,090,152.14 as at December 31, 2020 was doubtful due to the existence of long outstanding and dormant receivables from OUs, NGOs/POs, NGAs and other receivables aggregating P20,160,967.79 thus, affecting the fair presentation of the receivables accounts in the financial statements of CO and ROs III, IV V, IX and XIII under COA Circular No. 94-013 and COA Circular No. 2007-001.



We recommended that the Management require the:



a)	responsible officer/personnel from NCIP-CO, ROs III and IV to intensify its effort to locate the whereabouts of the former officers and employees with outstanding accountabilities to compel them to settle their accounts;



b)	otherwise, consider request from COA for write-off of Other Receivables accounts in accordance with COA Circular No. 2016-005 dated December 19, 2016.



c)	responsible officer/personnel from NCIP-CO to enforce payment of the receivables from the NCIP’s officers and employees by formulating a scheme to deduct the accountabilities from their salaries and from the other benefits for the newly retired officer;



d)	Accountant and concerned personnel from RO III to immediately collate and submit documents for the timely preparation of the request for write-off and submit the same together with all necessary documents and proper justification to COA for its timely disposition;



e)	responsible officer/personnel from RO V to inquire into the status of the fund transferred to the Bicol University and require to submit the necessary liquidation reports to account for its utilization;



f)	responsible officer/personnel from RO IX to intensify the settlement of disallowances, charges to all employees who are still in the service;



g)	responsible officer/personnel from RO IX to seek the approval of COA to pay disallowances on installment basis pursuant to COA Resolution No. 2015-031 dated August 20, 2015; and



h)	concerned officials of NCIP Agusan del Sur and Surigao del Norte (RO XIII) for the immediate liquidation and return of the unutilized amount of the long outstanding fund transfer. Moreover, determine factors that caused the delay in the submission of liquidation documents so that remedial measures can be instituted.



6.	The non-receipt of NCIP RO XIII financial assistance estimated at P14M from Taganito HPAL (THPAL) Nickel Corporation reckoned from Calendar Years 2014 to 2020 is not in adherence to the provisions of MOA executed between and among the Taganito Mining Corporation, THPAL, Mamanwa ICCs of Brgys. Taganito and Urbiztondo and NCIP, thereby depriving the agency of implementing more programs and projects utilizing the said fund to benefit Indigenous Peoples/Indigenous Cultural Communities in Caraga.



	We recommended that the responsible official of RO XIII to follow-up the Taganito HPAL Nickel Corporation on the status of the release of the financial assistance as provided in the said MOA and its Addendum. Furthermore, once received, direct the Accountant to account receipt of the financial assistance as government funds pursuant to Section 63 of Presidential Decree 1445.	



7.	The reported year-end balance of Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) accounts totaling P139,708,692.87 could not be relied upon due to the following deficiencies of CO and ROs II, III, V, IX, XII and XIII: (a) un-updated PPE Ledger Cards (PPELC) and Stock Cards; (b) Unreconciled Report on Physical Count of Property, Plant and Equipment (RPCPPE) and General Ledger; (c) non-issuance and/or renewal of Property Acknowledgment Receipt (PAR) on some issued PPEs to end-users; (d) absence of Property Sticker/Number on each newly acquired/purchased PPE; (e) PPEs found on station but were not included on the inventory list; (f) unserviceable PPEs of ROs V, VI/VII, XII and XIII amounting to P3,146,727.02 was not disposed contrary to relevant rules and regulations; and (g) PPE aggregating P596,794.00 identified as unserviceable were removed/dropped from the RPCPPE without basis. Moreover, there were NCIP Official and Employees with two or more laptops under its custody and One unit of Nikkon D3400 DSLR Camera that was not surrendered/turned over to the Property Officer by the employee who retired from the service.



We recommended that management to require the:



a)	Property Officer (PO) in NCIP-CO to monitor the issuances of units prior to the issuances of new units to AOs in order to avoid multiple possession of units with same usage;



b)	NCIP-CO’s AOs with more than one unit to return those excess units under its possession to the PO for proper recording and monitoring;



c)	Concerned Official to strictly adhere to the necessity of procuring those units under the semi-expendable to avoid duplication and wastage of government funds;



d)	Responsible Official in RO II to require the retired employee, to return/surrender immediately the Nikkon D3400 DSL Camera otherwise, he will be liable to pay the corresponding amount of the equipment;



e)	Inventory Committee of ROs III and XII to accomplish properly the prescribed Report on the Physical Count of PPE (Appendix 73 of GAM Volume II). In the event that there is discrepancy between the RPCPPE and the PPELC, the Supply Officer and the Accountant should reconcile the differences noted to have a reliable Financial Statement;



f)	Supply Officer of RO III to issue the necessary Property Acknowledgment Receipt (PAR) for those issued PPEs under the custody of the end-users as required by the regulation. Copies of the PARs should be kept on file, maintained, updated and provided for each recipient which will form part of the records as basis for their renewal every third year after issue under Appendix 71 of GAM NGAs Volume II; 



g)	Supply Officer of RO III to issue Property Sticker/Number for newly acquired/purchased PPE in order to identify and trace the location of the said PPEs; 



h)	Responsible Official of RO III to consider augmentation of personnel who can assist the Supply Officer in RO III, if needed, to improve the overall controls in the recording and monitoring of the Agency’s PPE;



i)	Property Officer of ROs V, VI/VII, XII and XIII to prepare the Inventory and Inspection Report for Unserviceable Property (IIRUP) and the Disposal Committee to immediately undertake disposal of said items to partially recover the cost and prevent further deterioration due to long storage after which, furnish a copy of the IIRUP to the Accountant for dropping from the books the cost of disposed PPE;



j)	direct the Property Officer of RO V to include the other infrastructure assets in the RPCPPE to reconcile with the accounting records;



k)	Responsible officer/personnel of RO IX to strictly comply with the guidelines set forth in the Property and Supply Management Manual and GAM in treating unserviceable properties and restore recording of these properties on the RPCPPE until disposal of the same;



l)	Accountant of RO XII to draw a JEV to record the disposal in the books of accounts upon receipt of the complete documents on disposal;



m)	Responsible personnel/Officials of RO XII to Strictly comply with the existing standards, rules and regulations;



n)	RO XIII to properly plan the schedule of the physical inventory-taking to allow ample time for reconciliation of records between the Property and Accounting Units. Moreover, require the Accountant and Supply Officer to regularly monitor and reconcile their records for proper check and balance and make the necessary adjustments on the discrepancies to reflect the correct balances of the PPE accounts; and



o)	Accountant of RO XIII to reconcile the unserviceable PPE recorded in the Other Assets account with the properties listed in the IIRUP and effect the necessary adjustment by drawing a JEV duly supported with supporting documents to derecognize the unserviceable properties pursuant to IPSAS 17.





8.	NCIP RO XIII failed to conduct a cost-benefit analysis prior to entering into a new Contract of Lease for Regional Office use as required under Annex H of 2016 Revised IRR of R.A. 9184, as amended. Moreover, the absence of documentary requirements renders the validity and regularity of the contract awarded and lease payments doubtful.



We recommend that Management of RO XIII, through the BAC to:



a.	strictly complies with the provisions in RA 9184 applicable to procurement activities of RO XIII;



	a)	observes the guidelines on Lease of Real Property and Venue under Annex H of the 2016 Revised IRR of R.A. 9184 as amended by GPPB Resolution No. 06-2018. Henceforth, prior to the renewal or entering into a new contract, conduct a cost-benefit analysis to ensure that the lease is most advantageous to the government; and



	b)	submits to the Audit Team the documentary requirements to establish the eligibility of the new lessor.





9.	Some officers of NCIP RO XII who are regularly availing the services of the agency’s vehicles were also receiving the transportation allowance in full, totaling P118,000.00 as of December 31, 2020, contrary to the General Provisions of General Appropriations Act, thus, overstating the expense account and understating the corresponding income account.  



	We recommended that the Management of RO XII strictly observe the following:



a.	concerned officials regularly using agency vehicle, waive the transportation allowance and immediately refund the TA previously receive;



b.	officials irregularly using agency vehicle, comply with Item 2.3 of COA Circular No. 2000-005 dated October 4, 2000 which states that “Whenever an official or employee entitled to transportation allowance uses the government vehicle issued to his office, a corresponding proportionate reduction on his transportation allowance shall be made”; and



	c)	require the regional accountant to determine the total amount to be refunded subject to the verification of COA.





10.	Management failed to implement its control over the recording and monitoring of incomplete supporting documents for the duly approved payroll of NCIP CO contrary to the government documentary requirement.





We recommended that Management require the:



a)	concerned Accounting and Human Resource Management Division (HRMD) Personnel of NCIP-CO to strictly observe the documentary requirements;



b)	concerned Accounting and HRMD Personnel of NCIP CO to exclude or separate the payroll of those employees with incomplete documents; and



c)	HRMD Personnel of NCIP-CO to strategically impose penalties or reprimand those erring employees who cannot accomplish/complete the required documents on deadlines.



11.	Disbursements of ROs CAR, III, IV and VI/VII aggregating P18,057,341.24 were not supported with sufficient/complete supporting documents contrary to PD No. 1445 and Section 15, Chapter 2 of the GAM, Volume I, thus, the legality/validity of the expenses could not be ascertained.



We recommended that Management require the:



a)	ROs CAR, III, IV, VI and VII to ensure that all disbursements are duly supported with the required documentary requirements as prescribed in COA Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012, and immediate submission of the same to the Audit Team;



b)	Regional Director of RO IV to instruct the project/program implementers to support the disbursed funds with complete documentation such as Fund Utilization Report, Report of Accomplishment, pictures of the implementation of distribution or implementation of projects/program, and list of beneficiaries with their signatures signifying their acceptance of the project/funds/goods/services received, aside from the attached canvass and official receipts; and



c)	Responsible official of RO CAR to Review further the Office’s project management and financial processes, to identify possible improvement opportunities that would address the recurring delays in submission of disbursement vouchers due to the incomplete documentation and delayed submission of claims for project and programmatic activity expenses.



12.	The reported year-end balance of salaries and wages – regular and PERA of NCIP-CO amounting to P74,993,138.94 and P2,733,723.73 respectively could not be relied upon due to un-submitted supporting documents.



We recommended that Management require the:



a)	Concerned Accounting and HMRD Personnel of NCIP-CO to immediately submit the payroll liquidations to the Audit Team; and



b)	NCIP-CO’s Accounting Division not to process Payroll DVs without the complete supporting documents.





13.	The agency’s payables accounts were unreliable due to: (a) inter- agency payable of RO III amounting to P1,085,662.21   could not be ascertained due to lack of supporting documents and the accounts have been dormant for more than five years; (b) Financial Liabilities account balance of RO CAR amounting to P1,035,475.40, included payables amounting to P257,657.38 that no longer represent valid claims; and (c) NCIP-CO’s payable amounting to P3,910.00 remains outstanding for two years or more.



			We recommended and Management agreed to:

	

		  a.	Require the Accountant of RO III to:

			

	i.	verify, review and analyze the dormant liability accounts, as required under COA Circular 97-001 and effect the necessary adjustments to arrive at the correct balances as of year-end;



	ii.	comply with the provisions of Section III (1 and 2) of PD 1445; and



	iii.	consider requesting for write-off of subject accounts in accordance with the provisions of COA Circular No. 2016-005 dated December 19, 2016. 



b. Concerned Accounting Personnel of NCIP CO and RO CAR to immediately revert the account to accumulated surplus or deficit of the general fund.



c. Accounting Division of NCIP CO not to process DVs without the complete supporting documents.









14.	The bonds of twenty-two AOs of NCIP RO VI/VII and one AO of RO X have expired but were not renewed with the BTr, contrary to the provisions of Treasury Circular No. 02-2009, resulting in the unprotected interest of the government in case of loss of agency funds. Moreover, the fidelity bond of the Disbursing Officer of RO XII amounting to P500,000.00 was insufficient to cover her accountability for cash advance of P2,215,000.00, contrary to Section 101 of P.D. 1445 and Item 5.1 of Treasury Circular No. 02-2009 dated August 6, 2009.

		

We recommended and Management agreed to direct the ROs VI/VII and X:



a)	concerned Accountable Officers (AOs) to promptly renew their bonds with the Bureau of Treasury;



b)	all AOs to keep track of their bond expiration dates and renew the same at least one (1) month before cancellation; and



c)	Chief Administrative Officer to regularly monitor the validity of the bonds of the agency’s AOs;



d)	Chief Administrative Officer to ensure that all AOs of the agency are bonded pursuant to the provisions of Treasury Circular No. 02-2009; and



e. 	Management of RO XII limit the accountabilities of the Accountable Officers to what is provided under Annex C of Section 5.1 of Bureau of Treasury Circular No. 02-2009 dated August 6, 2009.  Otherwise, Management shall increase their fidelity bonds to amount sufficient to cover the maximum accountabilities that they may handle for a given period, so as to protect the interest of the agency in case of losses resulting from unlawful use of government funds and losses attributable to negligence in the safekeeping of such funds.



		

15.	Disbursement Vouchers (DVs), Financial Reports (FRs), Purchase Orders (POs), Educational Assistance Program (EAP) Agreement, perfected contracts and other transaction documents of NCIP-CO, ROs I, II, II, IX, X, XII and XIII were not submitted, which resulted in significant delays ranging from 11 to 365 days were noted in the submission to the Audit Team, thus, precluding the timely audit of transactions and communication of noted deficiencies, if any.



We recommended that Management require the:



a)	Accounting Units of NCIP CO and ROs X, XII and XIII to submit the DVs, FRs and duly supported with documents to the Audit Team within the prescribed period to enable the timely reporting of audit results; 



b)	Accounting Units of RO X should see to it that the DVs have complete supporting documents before these will go to the office of the Cashier for the issuance of checks to avoid problems of delayed submission of documents;



c)	coordination among the RO IX Budget Officer, Cashier/ Collecting Officer and other Division Chiefs concerned, to be able to prepare the financial statements and other reports and be submitted to the COA on time;



d)	concerned officials of ROs IX, X and XIII to devise a strategy to improve the disbursement process, to cope with the backlogs regarding the submission of vouchers and financial reports, to ensure that supporting documents are complete and include this among its priority plans for the year;



e)	Acting Disbursing Officer and the Regional Accountant of RO XII to work back and locate all those missing/unsubmitted DVs and their corresponding supporting documents; and



f)	RO XII officials/employees responsible in the preparations of reports to observe the due dates in the submission of reports and to provide remedial measures to correct the cause of delay of submission, in order to assure that controls are operating effectively and recurring deficiencies found in audit would be immediately communicated to management.



	

16.	The NCIP RO VI/VII practices in the monitoring and monetization of leave credits were not in accordance with the Omnibus Rules on Leave, rendering the accuracy of the leave credit balances, unreliable.

	

	We recommended and Management agreed to:



a)	create a Committee or hire/assign additional personnel to backtrack computation of the correct leave balances as reflected in the leave cards and ensure that:

	

	i.	the entries for under times and absences reported in the leave cards match the data indicated in the DTRs;

	

	ii.	only a maximum of three (3) Special Leave Privileges are granted to employees within a calendar year;

	

	iii. Regular and Special Monetization are in compliance with Sections 22 and 23 of the Omnibus Rules on Leave;

	

	iv.	forfeited Mandatory/Forced Leaves are properly deducted from the Leave Card balances, unless disapproved by the Agency Head due to the exigency of the service; and

	

v.	leave cards are updated monthly with the utmost care and the balances be properly indicated;

	

b)		require the Designated HRMO to:

	

i)	regularly review the DTRs, Applications for Leave and supporting documents, and the postings made to the leave cards; and

		

ii)	undergo additional training with the Civil Service Commission on all aspects of personnel management to enhance/improve the system in place.

	

	

17.	Motor Vehicles of RO III and RO XII were not marked with prescribed “For Official Use Only,” contrary to provisions of COA Circular 75-6 item V. 2 dated November 7, 1975 which may have resulted to unnecessary and unofficial use of government vehicles. The agency also did not provide a garage for the protection of said government properties against wear and tear due to exposure to the elements. 



We recommended that management: 



a)	instruct the concerned personnel of ROs III and XII for the proper markings of “For Official Use Only” on the subject motor vehicle together with the name and logo of the NCIP in consonance to the provisions of COA Circular 75-6 item V. 2 dated November 7, 1975; and



b)	concerned Official of RO III to make representation with the higher authorities for the provision of funds needed in the construction of a garage for the   government vehicles;



c)	require the property officer of RO XII to secure government plate for the said vehicles; and



d)	RO XII to Stop charging gasoline and other expenses for the said vehicles unless the required marking “FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY” (3 inches) under which should be written the corresponding name of the Office or Logo is implemented.  







18.	Lapsed National Cash Allocations (NCAs) of NCIP RO III amounting to P7,880,113.92 were reverted to the unappropriated surplus of the General Fund as a result of the constraints brought about by the pandemic, thus affecting the optimal fund utilization and timely implementation of the projects, programs and activities of the agency pursuant to DBM-National Budget Circular No. 578 dated January 06, 2020. Moreover, Cash allocations received by RO V during CY 2020 amounting P2,185,000.00 lapsed and were reverted to the National Treasury; thereby, resulted in unpaid operating expenses as at year-end.





We recommended that Management require the:



a. 	concerned officials of RO III to improve monitoring of cash balances and disbursements pertaining to implementation of programs, activities and projects considering the adoption of applicable strategies under the current pandemic situation to maximize the utilization of funds.



b. Accountant of RO V to:



i. determines all payables and promptly process the related disbursement vouchers;



ii. request for funds for the agency’s payables;



iii. submit all the necessary documents to DBM for funding; and 



iv. maximize utilization of the NCAs/NTAs received to avoid reversion thereof and accumulation of accounts payable at year end.

						

						

19.	NCIP-RO IV and VI/VII failed to re-visit the Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) of the unused funds under CIB-LCCA P1,081,922.54 and P139,116.61, to determine the term and purpose for which funds were established, and to revert to the National Treasury if the said were expired and purpose were attained in accordance to Section 10 of General Provision FY2020 of RA No. 11465 and Executive Order No. 338 dated May 7, 1996, thereby depriving the National Government of the optimum use of resources and exposing fund to possible misuse. 

			

		We recommended that Management agreed to: 



a)	RO VI/VII utilize the remaining portion of the EPANAW Fund and liquidate the same to the Tourism Promotions Board;



b)	Revert the remaining P5,261.46 to the account of the National Treasury



c)	Effect closure of the agency’s Cash in Bank – Local Currency, Current Account (CA 3292-1041-53).



d)	Instruct the Concerned Official of RO IV to re-visit the MOA of the remaining funds for the Delineation and Titling donated by Aglubang Intex amounting to P885,619.00 and for Philippine Plan Action to Control Tuberculosis Project transferred by the Department of Health amounting to P196,303.54 to determine the purpose and term for which funds were established; and



e)	Revert to the National Treasury if the said funds were found expired and purpose were attained.



	

	20.	Allowances for Educational Assistance and Merit-Based Scholarship grantees in RO XII were paid out of the cash advances granted to the Disbursing Officer instead of depositing them directly to the respective bank accounts of the former, contrary to DBM Circular Letter No. 2018-014 dated December 28, 2018, thus, may result to possible risk of loss or misuse of the cash.  



We recommended that the Management:



 a.	requires and inform all the grantees that it is a must to open and submit to NCIP XII their respective bank accounts in order to deposit the educational allowances intended for them;



b.	issue checks as payment to the grantees with no bank accounts yet;



c.	allows the grant of cash advance to disbursing officer only for those grantees studying in places with no banks available; and 



d.	require the personnel in-charge in the Scholarship/Grants to facilitate the early preparation and submission of their claims to avoid voluminous transactions pending in the accounting section especially at the end of the quarter, thus, to avoid also the granting of cash advance before the lapsing of the fund.





21.1	NCIP RO XIII resorted to a Negotiated Procurement - Small Value Procurement (53.9) for the lease of privately owned real property for Regional Office use with an Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC) of P115,584.00 per month, or a total of P1,387,008.00 for one (1) year period, which were not supported with three (3) Request for Quotations (RFQs) of known qualifications, contrary to Item 8(b) (ii), Annex H of the Revised IRR of RA 9184; thus transparency and competitiveness of the procurement process could not be ascertained.



We recommended that Management Require the BAC to strictly comply with the provisions of Item 8(b) (ii), Annex H of the Revised IRR of RA 9184 by obtaining three RFQs from qualified/eligible suppliers/lessors for procurement through small value procurement to ensure transparency and competitiveness of the procurement process. 



21.2.	The required advertisement and posting of procurement opportunity and the posting of Notice of Award in the Philippine Government Electronic Procurement System (PhilGEPS) website on the conduct of Negotiated Procurement-Small Value Procurement (53.9) for Lease of Real Property we’re not complied with by the NCIP RO XIII, contrary to Item IV, E (3), and L (2) of Annex H of 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of RA 9184; thus, defeating the principle of transparency in the procurement process.

 

We recommended that Management strictly comply with the provisions of Item IV, E (3), and L (2) of Annex H of 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of RA 9184 on the posting of the Advertisement and Procurement Opportunity and the corresponding Notice of Award in the PhilGEPS website to promote transparency in the procurement process.



21.3	A total amount of P100,165.00 for van rental was paid to FRC Transport Services, which is owned by a certain employee of NCIP RO XIII, contrary to the provisions of PD 1445. Moreover, the employed alternative mode of procurement through Shopping is not in consonance with the guidelines set in the Revised IRR of RA 9184.



			We recommended that Management requires the BAC to:



	a)	Submit an explanation on the absence of Resolution recommending to the HOPE to enter into a contract with the employee/officer of NCIP RO XIII and why the alternative mode of procurement through Shopping was employed;



	b)	Adhere to the provisions of PD 1445 on the prohibition against pecuniary interest by any accountable or responsible officer in any contract or transaction of the agency where he is an officer; and



	c)	Adhere to the provisions of RA 9184 and its Revised IRR in every step of the procurement process and in the determination of the appropriate mode of procurement to be employed.











22.	Payments for catering services and other supplies during meetings, trainings, and other activities of NCIP RO XIII in the total amount of P985,603.50 were procured from the cooperative of its employees, posing a conflict of interest and undue advantage to other bidders as viewed in GPPB Non-Policy Matter (NPM) opinion No. 142-2014 dated December 10, 2014, thus, restricted under its Circular No. 08-2017 dated July 31, 2017.





We recommended that Management:



a)	Require the BAC to refrain from transacting with the Agency’s own employees’ cooperative to adhere to the provisions of GPPB Circular          No. 08-2014 to avoid conflict of interest; and



b)	Require the Accountant and other officers concerned to submit all the lacking supporting documents to the disbursement vouchers indicated in this report.





23.	The controls placed over the cash disbursement system of NCIP RO XIII are weak due to non-segregation of incompatible functions, non-stamping of paid on the disbursement voucher and all its supporting documents, and laxity in the authorization controls in their electronic banking facilities, which resulted in the double/excess payments totaling P164,675.77; thus, agency funds are not properly safeguarded against unwarranted risks of possible loss or misuse.



We recommended that Management:



a. designates an employee from the Accounting Unit tasked to prepare LDDAP-ADA and SLIIE covering approved DVs and supporting documents, pursuant to DBM Circular Letter No. 2018-14;



b.  requires the Acting Cashier and the Accounting Unit to maintain a logbook on the receipt and release of the LDDAP-ADA and its supporting documents for control purposes to ensure that the documents of the agency will be appropriately safeguarded against possible loss;



a)	make a written follow-up to the Government Servicing Bank relative to the change of maker and authorizers of the agency for the eMDS and verify whether past accounts of former employees on the electronic banking facility were closed/disabled; and 



b)	establish guidelines on the use of eMDS to ensure that necessary steps are taken to address and monitor the control weaknesses identified, taking into consideration the adequate segregation of duties, proper authorization controls, and access privileges, among others.

24.	The NCIP CO and ROs I, III, IV, IX and XII failed to prepare/submit plans and programs intended to address gender issues, contrary to Section 31 of the GP of the GAA of FY 2020 (RA No. 11465).



We recommended that:



a.  NCIP CO and ROs I, III, IV, IX and XII GAD focal point to:



i.	submits GAD Plan and Budget and Accomplishment Report to PCW for review and approval as required;



ii.	submit to the Audit Team Accomplishment Report and approved GAD Plan and Budget reviewed by the PCW;



b. responsible officials of RO I to Direct the concerned GAD focal person to submit the Approved Annual GPB for CY 2020 and the corresponding AR as of December 31, 2020 to the Audit Team.





25.	NCIP CO, ROs III, V, X and XII failed to formulated and implemented plans and programs intended to address issues, and concerns of Senior Citizens and PWDs, in compliance with Sections 32 of the GP of the GAA of FY 2020 (RA No. 11465).

	

We recommended that Management should give importance to the development of programs to address the concerns of senior citizens and persons with disability through formulation and implementation of plans, projects and programs to address the concerns of the SCs and PWDs and activities related to Youth in compliance with Section 32 and 33 of the General Provision of the FY 2020 GAA.





26.	The NCIP-CO failed to formulate and implement plans and programs intended for mainstreaming of disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation and mitigation in all agency program and projects, contrary to Section 36 of the GP of the GAA, FY 2020, thus, depriving the target beneficiaries of the benefits that maybe derived therefrom.



    We recommended that Management:



a)		require the Budget Officer to identify and tag in the OSBP and submit to CCC and DBM the list of tagged climate change PAPs during the annual submission of budget proposal for review/evaluation, in accordance with CCC-DBM Joint Memorandum Circular No. 2013-01, copy furnish the Office of the Auditor;

	

b)		require the OSSESSC Director and the Budget Officer to write a justification on why the disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation and mitigation were not incorporated on their PAPs nor identified and tagged in the OSBP any climate change-related expenditures of the Agency; 



c)		direct the OSESSC Director to submit the agency’s plans and programs/projects, and accomplishment reports related to disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation; and

	

d)		direct the OSESSC Director to formulate and implement plans, programs and projects intended to mainstreaming of disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation and mitigation in all agency program and projects in NCIP CO.

	



27.	The expanded withholding tax on payments to professionals in RO CAR was not consistently applied in the payments of honoraria to outsourced resource persons and facilitator contrary to BIR Revenue Regulation No. 11-2018. In addition, RO V failed to withhold taxes on Job-Order (JO) Personnel during the year depriving the government of the income that could have been accrued to the National Treasury.   



We recommended that:



a. RO CAR to deduct the prescribed withholding tax from all payments of honoraria to professionals outsourced by the Regional Office in compliance with BIR RR No. 11-2018;



b. Responsible personnel in RO V to withhold the applicable tax on job order personnel in accordance to individual tax classification and remit the same to the BIR within the prescribed period; and



c. RO V to require JO personnel to submit the duly accomplished BIR Form 1901 and Sworn Declaration, stamped received by the BIR, to justify non-withholding of tax from the income payment made to them.     





28.	Insurable properties of ROs II, IV, IX and X amounting to P17,382,038.60, P8,173,346.83, P19,140,932.58 and P18,661,537.75, respectively and four motor vehicles of RO V were not insured with the Property Insurance Fund of the GSIS contrary to RA No. 656; thus, depriving the agency to be indemnified in the event of damage to or loss of such insurable assets/properties due to fire, earthquake, storm or other fortuitous events.



We recommended that Management require the:



a.  concerned RO IV Regional Directors make personal representation with the NCIP-CO to discuss the inclusion of the payment of the computed property insurance premiums in their budget;



b. responsible officer/personnel of ROV to ensure compliance with laws, regulations and policies governing the proper and adequate registration and insurance coverage of motor vehicle to be able to avail of the GSIS Property Replacement in cases of loss or damage;



c.  responsible officer/personnel RO II to follow up the result of evaluation of the submitted insurable properties to the GSIS and immediately request funding therof to ensure that all insurable properites are indemnified in case unforseen events may happen.  Likewise adhere strictly to the provisions of RA No. 656, otherwise known as the Property Insurance Law;



d.  Property and Supply Officer of RO X to submit list of insurable assets of the agency using the Property Insurance Form (PIF) to the General Insurance Fund of the GSIS as basis for the assessment of general insurance coverage;



e.  responsible personnel of RO X to submit a copy of the insurance policy to the Auditor’s Office; and



f.  responsible personnel of RO X to submit an explanation why the provisions of the Property Insurance Law were not complied;



g)	responsible officials of RO IX insure its insurable properties with the General Insurance Fund of the GSIS in compliance with COA Circular No. 92-390 and RA 656, as amended, specially that NCIP had fire incident. It is further recommended that Management make a strong representation with DBM thru NCIP Central Office for additional MOOE of NCIP Region IX for this purpose. 



29.	Meals and accommodations of NCIP RO XIII amounting to P1,064,219.06 for NTF-ELCAC Regional Action Planning Workshop were not duly supported with sufficient and complete documentation as required in Section 4.6 of PD 1445 and COA Circular No. 2012-001; thus, casting doubts on the propriety and regularity of the transaction. Moreover, the procurement was not done through a competitive Public Bidding inconsistent with the provisions of RA 9184 and its Revised IRR.



We recommended that Management require the:



a.   Require the concerned employees/officers to submit the approved Activity Design/Project Proposal, duly signed Abstract of Quotations and Supplemental Annual Procurement Plan for FY 2019 for further evaluation in audit;



	a)	Submit justification/explanation why Competitive Bidding was not used in the procurement; and



	b)	Advise the BAC to adhere to the provisions of RA 9184 and its Revised IRR in every step of the procurement process and in the determination of the appropriate mode of procurement to be employed.





G)	Status of Audit Suspensions, Disallowances and Charges



Total suspensions and disallowances amounting to P5,201,540.14 and P8,460,635.08, respectively, remained unsettled at year-end contrary to Section 7.1.1 of the 2009 Rules and Regulations on the Settlement of Accounts (RRSA) prescribed under COA Circular No. 2009-006 dated September 15, 2009.



F. Status of Implementation of Prior Year’s Audit Recommendations

	Of the 105 audit recommendations embodied in the 2019 Annual Audit Report (AAR), 34 were implemented and 71 were not implemented. The details are presented in Part III of this report.



				xx













