

 PART- II- AUDIT OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS



The audit of the accounts and financial transactions of the Don Honorio Ventura State University (DHVSU) for calendar year 2020 disclosed certain observations that needed correction and/or improvement. Our observations with the corresponding recommendations are discussed in detail in the succeeding paragraphs.



Financial and Compliance Audit



Weaknesses in the internal control system on cash management



1)	Inadequacy of controls was noted on the cash management system of the University as manifested in unsound practices such as (i) failure of the Acting Cashier to renew her fidelity bond; (ii) pre-signing of all blank Official Receipts (O.R.s) by the sub-collector even prior to actual collection and issuance to payor; (iii) unused O.R.s for the defunct canteen were not turned over to the Property Custodian for safekeeping; and (iv) combination of the vault was not changed upon assumption of the new Cashier. As a consequence, cash is not safeguarded against possible losses through theft, misuse or misappropriation, inconsistent with Section 124 of Presidential Decree (P.D.) No. 1445. 

   

1.1	Section 124 of Presidential Decree (P.D.) No. 1445 states that it shall be the direct responsibility of the agency head to install, implement and monitor a sound system of internal control. As part of our audit of the Cash account, an evaluation of the internal control system on cash management of the University was conducted. Also, a review of management’s compliance with previous audit observations on the said area was performed, and deficiencies were noted as of December 31, 2020; to wit: 



a)	The Acting Cashier was no longer bonded at the time of cash count. 



 A cash examination was conducted by the Audit Team on July 23, 2020. Upon verification of the accountable officer’s fidelity bond, we noted that it was already expired effective July 20, 2020 or before the date of cash count contrary to Section 4.1 of Treasury Circular No. 02-2009 dated August 6, 2009. The failure of the accountable officer (AO) to apply early for the renewal of the bond put the interest of the government at risk in the event of cash shortage either due to theft or misuse. 



b)	The blank/unissued Official Receipts (ORs) under the custody of the sub-collector have long been signed before the collection/issuance to the payor/s.



	Immediately, after the cash count, an inventory of unissued ORs in the custody of the sub-collector was conducted. Verification showed that all unissued ORs in the custody of the sub-collector were already pre-signed by her, reportedly for convenience purposes. However, we noted that in times when the sub-collector was absent from work, the reliever would continue using the pre-signed ORs. As such, the ORs issued bear the signature of the sub-collector who was absent and not the signature of the reliever. With this practice, it would be difficult to ascertain or establish the accountability of the AOs, which may increase the risk of losses. 

	

c)	Unused ORs by the defunct University canteen have remained idle for a period of five years and were not handed over by the Acting Cashier to the Property Custodian.



In the conduct of inventory of unused accountable forms (AFs) by the Audit Team, it was observed that ORs (intended for use by the University Canteen) with inclusive serial numbers 5108252 to 5110700 or 2,449 pieces remained unissued in the custody of the Acting Cashier. On March 2015, which is now more than five years ago, the Canteen had ceased its operation when the Officer-in-Charge thereof retired from the service. Since then, these ORs were kept by the Acting Cashier and no longer used for collection. The same should have been returned to the Property Custodian for safekeeping and subsequent disposal, if already obsolete.  This measure is required to ensure that AFs, just like cash, are duly accounted for as part of the AO’s accountability. 



d)	The combination code of the cash vault assigned to the former cashier was not changed and still used by the Acting Cashier. 



 This is a reiteration of the Audit Team’s previous observation. As commented earlier by management, the Property Custodian (PC) shall contact the supplier of the vault and promised that communication will be sent to the manufacturer of the safe for the change of combination. As of audit date, appropriate action was not initiated by the PC in compliance with the audit recommendation.   

		

1.2	The above lapses could be attributed to inadequate monitoring of the existing system on cash management, particularly on the provision of the required physical and administrative safeguards by the University, which is the responsibility of the Agency Head pursuant to Section 124 of P.D. No. 1445. 	



	1.3     We recommended and the University President agreed to (a) instruct the Acting Cashier to (i) promptly renew her fidelity bond before its expiration date; (ii) advise the sub-collector against the practice of pre-signing blank ORs; and (iii) coordinate with the Property Custodian for the disposition of the 2,449 pieces of ORs  under her accountability and, if still in good condition,  use the same in the collection of Student Fees; otherwise, surrender the same for proper disposal; and (b) direct the Property Custodian to immediately contact a vault technician within the locality to assist the Cashier in changing the combination of the safety vault.  

	

	

	



Idle funds deposited under Current Account - ₱130.00M



2)	Additional interests calculated at ₱1.74M could have been earned by the University had it converted idle bank deposits of ₱130.00M, out of the ₱185.92M average monthly deposit balance under the Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) Current Accounts (CAs), to High Yield Savings Accounts (HYSAs) which offer a relatively higher interest rate.  



2.1	Republic Act (R.A.) No. 8292, an Act providing for the uniform composition of the governing boards, the manner of appointment and term of office of the president of chartered state universities and colleges, and for other purposes states, among others, under Section 4, paragraph (d) that:



Such fees and charges, including government subsidies and other income generated by the university or college, shall constitute special trust funds and shall be deposited in any authorized government depository bank, and all interests that shall accrue therefrom shall form part of the same fund for the use of the university or college.  



2.2	R.A. No. 9832 dated December 9, 2009 which created the Don Honorio Ventura State University (DHVSU) as a university and, therefore, serves as its charter also provides the same regulations under Section 7 (e), paragraph 2. 



2.3	An effective cash management system entails implementing the budget efficiently; maximizing the opportunity cost of resources from idle cash balances or funds not immediately needed in the operation of an agency to generate/yield additional cash by earning interest income; and minimizing the cost of borrowing should there be a need for it. 



2.4	We made an inquiry from the Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) regarding savings deposits which are interest-bearing. They informed us that the High Yield Savings Account (HYSA) and Time Deposits offer the same interest rate. However, the Bank Official suggested that the HYSA is more appropriate for government agencies like DHVSU due to the following special features:



a)	no documentary stamps required;

b)	the term can be monthly, quarterly, every six months or annually;

c)	withdrawals from deposits can be made once a month, regardless of term; and

d)	automatic roll-over of the interest to the principal to earn interest.



2.5	Our verification showed that the University has not taken the opportunity to maximize its income. 



	1)		Analysis of the Cash in Bank account of the University was made for a two-year period covering January 1, 2019 up to December 31, 2020. The Cash in Bank account is under the regular current account which earns interest on a quarterly basis at the rate of 1/10 of 1% per annum, which has remained the same for calendar year 2019 to December 31, 2020.

	

	2)	Further study of the University’s cashflows revealed that the average monthly disbursements or fund utilization during the two-year period was only ₱29,940,228.28 or 16.10% of the available funds which averaged to ₱185,920,482.26. For the afore-cited period, the accounts earned interests at a maximum rate of 1/10 of 1% per annum minus 20% withholding tax. On the aggregate, DHVSU enjoyed interest income at a net amount of ₱334,730.33, a detailed computation of which is presented in Appendix A.



	3)	Had these funds been placed in another investment facility, specifically High Yield Savings Accounts (HYSAs) being offered by LBP, an authorized government bank, a higher interest rate of 1.00% per annum applies; hence, interest income would have been ten times higher. 



2.9	For purposes of illustration, we compared the interests on bank deposits under the regular Current Account as against the HYSA assuming an average monthly balance of ₱185,920,482.26 and a recommended deposit in the HYSA of ₱130,000,000.00. As could be gleaned in the table below, there is a material difference of approximately ₱1,745,269.67 in interest for the two- year period.







Type of Deposit

(a)

 

Average

 Monthly

 Balance

(b)

Interest for two-year period





Current Acct.

0.001%/annum (2019 to 2020)

(c)

HYSA

(net of tax)

1.00%/ annum (2019 to 2020)

(d)





Difference

e (d-c)

Current Account: Income Fund



HYSA:

Income Fund

Safe amount that could be transferred to HYSA after providing average cash requirement for disbursements

₱185,920,482.26







₱130,000,000.00

₱334,730.33









₱2,080,000.00









₱1,745,269.67

		

2.10	Although investing is not within the mandate of the University, it is the principal duty of the Agency Head and the officials of the Finance Department to manage the University funds wisely and economically.    



2.11	We recommended and the University President agreed to instruct the Director of Finance Management Services to consider the transfer of idle/unused balances of bank accounts from the regular Current Accounts to HYSAs of the LBP to maximize the earning potential of its deposits, thus, significantly boosting the financial capacity of the University.

	



Unrecorded donated property



3)	Four parcels of land donated to DHVSU Satellite Campus situated at Sta. Catalina, Lubao, Pampanga were not recognized in the books of accounts of the University due to absence of cost/appraised values in the deed of donation contrary to the provisions of Chapter 3 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume III and Section 5, Chapter 10, Volume I of the same Manual, thus, understating the balance of the Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) accounts as at year-end.



3.1	Republic Act (R.A.) No. 9832, An Act Converting the Don Honorio Ventura College of Arts and Trades in the Municipality of Bacolor, Province of Pampanga into a State University to be known as the Don Honorio Ventura Technological State University (DHVTSU) and appropriating Funds Therefore provides in Sections 2 and 7(d) thereof:



		Sec. 2.   General Mandate. – The University shall primarily provide advanced instruction and professional training in education, engineering, science and technology, arts and humanities, computer and other relevant fields of study. It shall also undertake research, extension services and production activities in support of the socioeconomic development of Pampanga and provide progressive leadership in its areas of specialization. 



Sec. 7.	Powers and Duties of the Board of Regents. The Board shall have the following specific powers and duties, in addition to its general powers of administration and the exercise of all powers granted to the board of directors of a corporation under existing laws:



	(d) To receive in trust legacies, gifts and donations of real properties of all kinds and to administer and dispose of the same when necessary for the benefit of the University, and subject to the limitations, directions and instructions of the donor, if any.



3.2	The DHVSU is a state institution of higher learning that provides inexpensive quality vocational, professional and technological instruction and training in the Province of Pampanga. Furthermore, the establishment of satellite campuses in various congressional districts of the Province is one of its commitments as prescribed by the Commission on Higher Education (CHED).



3.3	On March 19, 2018, a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) was entered into by and between DHVSU and the Provincial Government of Pampanga (PGP) for the establishment of DHVSU Campus at Sta. Catalina, Lubao, Pampanga which shall offer various curricular programs for the benefit of its residents and those of its neighboring municipalities. 



3.4	On June 27, 2019, a Deed of Donation with Condition was executed by the Municipality of Lubao, Pampanga in favor of DHVSU for the donation of parcels of land, in line with its mandate under the Local Government Code to provide programs and projects that focus on the intellectual and academic development of the youth and its inhabitants.  The Deed of Donation states further that in the event the Donee ceases to use the donated properties for the specific purposes for which these are being donated or deviates therefrom, this Donation shall lose its force and effect and ownership of the donated properties shall automatically revert back to the Donor.



	1)	To facilitate the land transfer, DHVSU procured the services of an entity for the segregation, filing and processing of the transfer of Certificate of Title in the Offices of Local Government Unit, Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) and Registry of Deeds (RD) for a cost of ₱120,000.00. The land donated consists of 21,424 sq.ms. under four transferred titles as presented below:



TCT No.

Registered in the Name of

Description

Area (sq.m.)

042-2020004087

Don Honorio Ventura State University

Located at Sta. Catalina, Lubao, Pampanga

864

042-2020002593

Don Honorio Ventura State University

Located at Sta. Catalina, Lubao, Pampanga

7,083

042-2020002594

Don Honorio Ventura State University

Located at Sta. Catalina, Lubao, Pampanga

6,836

0422020002595

Don Honorio Ventura State University

Located at Sta. Catalina, Lubao, Pampanga

6,641



Total



21,424



	2)	Relatedly, verification of accounting records was done by the Audit Team to validate the recording of the aforementioned donated property. As of December 31, 2019, the account Land was reported with an ending balance of ₱2,310,750.00. No transaction was posted to the account in calendar year 2020; thus, the same balance was reflected in the General Ledger (GL) as of December 31, 2020.  A schedule was obtained from the Accounting Unit as of year-end, and noted five parcels all registered in the name of DHVSU, but the locations and TCT numbers were different as shown in the table below:







TCT/OCT No.

Description

Area 

(sq.m.)

Cost

TCT-7582-R

Located at Bacolor, Pampanga

50,000

₱900,000.00

TCT-399949-R

Located at Mexico, Pampanga

3,768

434,025.60

 

Located at Mexico, Pampanga

3,684

552,259.40

TCT-40225-R

Located at Mexico, Pampanga

8,107

198,573.40

TCT-399950-R

Located at Mexico, Pampanga

9,212

225,891.60





74,771

 ₱2,310,750.00



3.7	Chapter 3 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume III provides that the Land account is used to recognize the cost incurred in the purchase/reclamation or fair value if acquired through donation or transfers without cost of land. Credit this account upon disposal or reclassification to Investment Property account. 



3.8	Moreover, Section 5, Chapter 10, Volume I of the same Manual states: 



Measurement at Recognition – PPE that qualifies for recognition as an asset shall be measured at cost. However, where the PPE is acquired through a non-exchange transaction, its cost shall be measured at its fair value as at the date of acquisition.



3.9	The University Accountant should have traced from the Provincial/Municipal Assessor’s Office, the Tax Declaration (TD) covering the donated lots, if any. The TD will show the particularity of the property, including the assessed and/or market values which could serve as reference in the determination of fair value of the land. Confirmation may also be made from the Municipal Accounting Office, Municipality of Lubao, Pampanga on the recorded cost of the property prior to the date of transfer of ownership to DHVSU.  



3.10	 The absence of cost in the deed of donation led to the non-recognition of the property which is inconsistent with Section 5, Chapter 10 of GAM for NGAs Volume I; thus, the Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) year-end account balances of the University were understated, which ultimately affected the fairness of presentation of the year-end financial statements.    



3.11	We recommended and the University President agreed to instruct the (a) Property Custodian to exert effort in obtaining the cost of the four donated lots from the donor’s records. In case, there are no available information, procure the services of an independent appraiser to determine the appraised values thereof; and (b) the Accountant, thru the Director, Finance Management Services, to record the said lots in the books of the University based on the appraised values. 











Unreliable balances of Property, Plant and Equipment



4)	The accuracy, existence and completeness of the Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) accounts with reported carrying amount of ₱1,555,032,968.10 as of December 31, 2020 were uncertain for failure of Management to a) conduct  complete physical inventory-taking of the PPE; b) maintain complete and properly accomplished Property, Plant and Equipment Ledger Cards (PPELCs) and Property Cards (PCs) in the prescribed form; c) maintain complete, updated, and properly accomplished PAR; and d) prepare and submit Inventory and Inspection Report for Unserviceable Property (IIRUP) to the Accounting Section for proper reclassification from the PPE accounts to Impairment Loss-PPE account, inconsistent with the pertinent rules and regulations of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume I.



	1)	Pertinent rules and regulations governing the management and accounting of the government property, plant and equipment are provided in Chapter 10 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume I, some of which are quoted as follows:

 

Section 38.  Physical Count of PPE. The entity shall have a periodic physical count of PPE, which shall be done annually and presented on the Report on the Physical Count of Property, Plant and Equipment (RPCPPE) (Appendix 71) as at December 31 of each year. This shall be submitted to the Auditor concerned not later than January 31 of the following year. Equipment found at station and losses discovered during the physical count shall be reported to the Accounting Division/Unit for proper accounting /recording.



Section 20. Recording of Deliveries. Deliveries of PPE shall be recorded immediately in the Property Card (Appendix 69) maintained by the Supply and/or Property Division/Unit on the basis of the IAR and other supporting documents. The IAR and other supporting documents shall be forwarded to the Accounting Division/Unit for the recording of deliveries in the books of accounts through JEV and in the Property, Plant and Equipment Ledger Card (PPELC) (Appendix 70). Based on the IAR and other supporting documents, the Supply and/or Property Division/Unit shall prepare the DV and submit to the Accounting Division/Unit for the processing of payment.



Section 21.  Issue of PPE.  Based on approved RIS, the Supply and/or Property Custodian shall prepare the Property Acknowledgement Receipt (PAR) (Appendix 71) to support the issue of property to end-user. The PAR shall be renewed at least every three years or every time there is a change in accountability or custodianship of the property.



	2)		Section 39 of the same Manual provides the derecognition, which states that the cost of the PPE together with the related accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment loss shall be removed from the accounts. The carrying amount of an item of PPE shall be derecognized on disposal or when no future economic benefits or service potential is expected from its use or disposal.

	

	3)		Section 40 (c), (d), supra, states that:

	

	c.    A PPE is said to be unserviceable if it is no longer capable of providing the entity with future economic benefits or service potential.

		

		d.  All unserviceable property shall be reported in the Inventory and Inspection Report of Unserviceable Property (IIRUP) (Appendix 74).  PPE reported in the IIRUP shall be dropped from the books by debiting Impairment Loss-Property, Plant and Equipment (cost of the PPE less Accumulated Depreciation).

		

		4.4	Section 42 of the afore-cited Manual provides Accounting and Property Records to be maintained for PPE. The Chief Accountant shall maintain the PPELC for each category of PPE including work and other animals, livestock etc. The PPELC shall be kept to record promptly the acquisition, description, custody, estimated useful life, depreciation, impairment loss, disposal and other information about the asset. For check and balance, the Property and Supply Office/Unit shall likewise maintain PC for PPE in their custody to account for the receipt and disposition of the same. The balance per PC shall be reconciled with PPELC maintained by the Accounting Division/Unit. They shall also be reconciled with other property records like PAR.

		

		4.5	However, review of the system of recording and accounting for PPE accounts disclosed the following deficiencies:

		

		4.5.1   	No physical count/inventory of PPE was conducted for CY 2020 in the main and satellite campuses of the University. In the previous year, only the College Departments in the main and satellite campuses were subjected to PPE physical count/inventory at the end of each school year except for the other offices like the administrative, non-academic and medical clinic. The personnel in charge of the inventory said that he cannot perform complete physical count/inventory of issued equipment and other asset items both in the academic and non-academic offices due to the volume of work.	

		

		4.5.2 	Property Cards were not used by the Property Unit to record the description, acquisition, transfer, disposal, and other information about the PPE for each class. Instead, they made use only of the Report on the Physical Count of Property, Plant and Equipment (RPCPPE) in the reconciliation of the account with the accounting records. As of February 3, 2021, the Audit Team requested from the Property Officer a copy of the RPCPPE as of December 31, 2020 but the report was not yet available. Instead, we were informed that they have to update and reconcile first with the accounting records. As such, the correctness of the RPCPPE may not be considered reliable since the financial statements of the University have already been submitted on January 25, 2021.



		4.5.3 	The Acknowledgement Receipt for Equipment (ARE) was still used instead of the revised form, Property Acknowledgement Receipt (PAR), to report the issuance of PPE and the acknowledgement of the end-user. Records showed that ₱101,154,624.34 worth of procured PPE for CYs 2019 and 2020 were not covered with PAR as presented in Appendix B. Without the PAR, there is no concrete evidence that such property or equipment is officially in the custodianship of the end-user.  



		4.5.4	 	The Property Officer failed to identify all unserviceable PPEs and render a report thereon to the Accounting Unit due to non-conduct of inventory taking of PPEs and non-submission of list from different academic and non-academic offices of the University. This explained why unserviceable PPE items were still carried under the PPE account balances as of year-end. 



		1)			 	Likewise, the PPELCs maintained by the Accounting Unit were incomplete, wherein only those for Infrastructure Projects were available for verification.

		

				4.6	 Owing to the aforementioned deficiencies and inadequacy of records maintained by the Property Custodian and the Accounting Unit, as well as the non-conduct of physical inventory of PPE during the year, the required reconciliation of inventory report with accounting records was not also performed. Consequently, the existence, accuracy and completeness of the PPE accounts with net carrying amount of ₱1,555,032,968.10 (Appendix C) were not established, rendering the recorded balances doubtful as of December 31, 2020. 

		

	1)			We recommended and the President agreed to undertake the following courses of action:



a)  cause the creation of an Inventory Committee under the supervision of the Property/Supply Officer who will be fully responsible for conducting a complete inventory-taking, maintenance and reconciliation of pertinent records as well as the submission of the Report on Physical Count of PPE (RPCPPE) to the Office of the Auditor; 

		

b) 	direct the Property/Supply Officer to (i) exhaust all possible means to complete the Property Card (PCs) in order to facilitate the regular reconciliation of the PPE accounts with accounting PPE Ledger Cards (PPELCs); (ii)   maintain complete and properly accomplished PAR instead of ARE to determine responsibility and accountability. The PAR shall be renewed every three years or every time there is a change in accountability; (iii) coordinate with all campuses in the preparation of the Inspection Report for Unserviceable Property (IIRUP) (Appendix 74) to document the inspection and appraisal of damaged/obsolete/worthless property by management in compliance with Section 40(d), Chapter 10 of the GAM for NGAs, Volume I; and (iv) submit to the Accounting Section the IIRUP and other pertinent documents to facilitate disposal of unserviceable items and serve as basis for their proper reclassification from the PPE accounts to the Impairment Loss-PPE account; and

	

	c)   direct the University Accountant to maintain the PPELC for each category of PPE to record promptly the acquisition, description, custody, estimated useful life, depreciation loss, disposal and other information about the assets.

	      



Uninsured properties -₱226,161,948.24



5)		Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) with a total carrying value of ₱226,161,948.24 were not insured with the Government Service Insurance System (GSIS), thus, exposing the items to inherent insurable risks, inconsistent with Republic Act (R.A.) No. 656 and COA Circular No. 2018-002 dated May 31, 2018. 



5.1	During the calendar year 2020, an audit was conducted by the Audit Team on the Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) accounts of the DHVSU consisting of Buildings and Other Structures, Infrastructure Assets, Machinery and Equipment, and Transportation Equipment. Part of the audit done was a review of the insurance policy obtained by the University for the year from the Government Service Insurance System (GSIS) for school and office buildings, transportation, machineries, equipment and other structures located at DHVSU Main, Mexico, Sto. Tomas, Porac, and Lubao campuses. 



	1)	COA Circular No. 2018-002 dated May 31, 2018 sets the guidelines prescribing the submission of the Property Inventory Form (PIF) as basis for the assessment of general insurance coverage over all insurable assets, properties and interests of the government with the General Insurance Fund (GIF) of the Government Service Insurance System (GSIS). This Circular was issued to assist in the implementation of the provisions of R.A. No. 656 on the insurance and bonding of risks on insurable government assets and properties with the GIF. 



	2)	Section 5 of COA Circular No. 2018-002 requires that:



5.1	Heads of government agencies shall direct the pertinent official under his/her supervision to:



a.  Secure directly from the GSIS GIF, all insurances or bonds covering properties, contract, rights of action, and other insurable risks of their respective offices;



a)	Prepare the Property Inventory Form (PIF) listing all the insurable properties and other assets, showing their latest appraised values/valuation, appraisal date, location, and other information;



b)	Extract from the Report on the Physical Count of Property, Plant and Equipment, as well as from the Report on the Physical Count of Inventories, prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Government Accounting Manual, the data for the PIF pertaining to the insurable assets and interest of the government (excluding impaired properties for disposal);



	d. Cause the appraisal of the insurable properties and other assets of their respective offices. For this purpose, an in-house appraisal shall be sufficient if the property or insurable interest has a value of ₱10 million and below. Otherwise, an independent appraisal shall be necessary;



e)	Submit the consolidated PIF to the Supervising Auditor/Team Leader and the GIF, GSIS, not later than April 30 of each year; 



f)	Include in the agency annual budget the amount of premiums for the general insurance covering all insurable properties and other assets and ensure its payment to the GSIS;  



g)	Ensure centralized payment of insurance premiums of all assets/property, whether located in the Central/Head Office (C/HO) or Regional/District Offices, Branches and/or Operating Units (R/DOs/Bs/OUs) in order to avoid double payment. The Head of the agency shall issue specific guidelines/instructions to the R/Dos/Bs/OUs to submit their respective accurate and updated PIF for consolidation at the C/HO.



	3)	In order to verify management’s compliance with R.A. No. 656 and COA Circular No. 2018-002, we requested from the Property Custodian a copy of the report on PIF CY 2020 of DHVSU that was reportedly submitted to the GSIS as of October 23, 2020. The Property Custodian informed us that on January 6, 2020, the Independent Appraiser already submitted his independent appraisal report to DHVSU Inventory Committee and the PIF Report (See Appendix D) dated February 3, 2020, which was prepared by the Chairman on Inventory Committee and approved by the University President. A copy was furnished to the Audit Team. 



	4)	Scrutiny of the PIF Report showed  insurable properties costing ₱226,161,948.24 which are due for insurance coverage with the GSIS for CY 2020; however, the Report is still pending with the Property Custodian for completion of some documents, such as the application form, pictures, inventories and letter request of the Physical Plant and Facilities (OPPF) of DHVSU Office to insure the PPE and inventories, as well as the contents of buildings/offices as basis of assessment of insurance coverage of all DHVSU’s government properties and insurable interests. Subsequently, the Property Officer forwarded the Report to the OPPF to validate correctness of some buildings and other structures that were still included but were already demolished as of report date. 



	5)	The slow turnover of reports and documents from one office to another caused significant delay in the filing of application and processing of the insurance. 



	6)	Further verification revealed that the latest insurance policies obtained by the University from the GSIS for buildings, equipment, other structures and their contents had already expired in April 2019.  The Property Officer should have immediately prepared and made available the PIF and all the necessary documents needed for the renewal of the insurance policy.  Nevertheless, a year and eight months have passed, yet the required PIF with complete supporting documents remained unsubmitted to the GSIS contrary to COA Circular No. 2018-002.  



	7)	For the long period that subject properties were not covered by property insurance as required under R.A. No. 656, government assets were further exposed to no indemnification from possible loss or damage in the eventuality of a force majeure or acts of nature. 



	8)	We recommended and the University President agreed to (a) instruct the Chairman of the Inventory Committee to take charge of the monitoring, review and evaluation of all DHVSU’s existing insurable assets to ensure their coverage with the GSIS insurance; (b) require the Director of the OPPF to prepare and submit on time to the GSIS updated list of buildings and other insurable structures together with all mandatory requirements; and (c) instruct the University Accountant to provide the Property Officer with a list of all newly constructed buildings and all other insurable properties to facilitate regular updating of insurance coverage.  





Unremitted proceeds from sale of scrap materials-₱435,974.52



6)	Proceeds totaling ₱435,974.52 from the sale of scrap materials from demolished buildings remained unremitted to the National Treasury which is not in compliance with Section 14 of the General Provisions of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 11465 or the General Appropriations Act (GAA) of CY 2020.



	1)		Section 14 of the General Provisions of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 11465 or the General Appropriations Act (GAA) for CY 2020 provides that:



Sale of Non-Serviceable, Obsolete or Unnecessary Equipment.

  Departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of the National Government, including Constitutional Offices enjoying fiscal autonomy are hereby authorized to sell non-serviceable, obsolete, or unnecessary equipment, including motor vehicles in accordance with Section 79 of P.D. 1445, E.O No. 309, s. 1996 and such other guidelines issued thereon. The proceeds from the sale of such equipment shall be deposited with the National Treasury as income of the General Fund pursuant to Section 44, Chapter 5, Book VI of E.O. No. 292.



	2)	Also, as discussed in Appendix 74 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume II, the disposal thru sale of subject property requires the preparation of the Inventory and Inspection Report of Unserviceable Property (IIRUP). This is a report prepared by the Supply and/or Property Unit which shall be submitted to the Accounting Division/Unit after the disposal to serve as basis of recording the dropping from the books of the unserviceable properties carried in the Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) accounts.



	3)	We have reviewed and validated the procedures and actions taken by management on our prior year’s audit observation pertaining to undisposed scrap materials from demolished buildings.



	4)	Management commented that in compliance with the previous audit recommendation, DHVSU Memorandum No. 30, Series of 2020 dated January 27, 2020 was issued to reconstitute the University Property Disposal Committee. The Memorandum advised the Committee to:



a)	Initiate measures for the immediate disposal of scrap materials as prescribed under the Manual on Disposal of Government Property to avoid further wear and tear of said materials and to remove unwanted sights from the campus premises; and



b)	Continually perform a physical inventory of all University property for disposal so that inventory records will reflect actual quantities on hand and adjustments are entered in the University’s accounting system.



6.5	For CY 2020, the University was able to dispose of scrap materials from unserviceable properties. The Audit Team verified the related documents on the disposal transactions including the Inventory and Inspection Report on Unserviceable Property (IIRUP) and the official receipts (O.R.s) evidencing the acknowledgement of proceeds from the sale of scrap materials. The income generated from the disposal aggregated to ₱435,974.52, the details of which are presented in Appendix E.



6.6	As of December 31, 2020, almost four months after disposal, records showed that the income from sale of unserviceable properties remained unremitted to the National Treasury which is not compliant with Section 14 of the General Provisions of R.A. No. 11465. 



6.7	We recommended and the University President concurred to direct the Director of the Finance Management Services (FMS) and the Accountant to immediately effect the remittance of the amount of ₱435,974.52 to the National Treasury in compliance with the afore-cited provisions of R.A. No. 11465 or the GAA of CY 2020. 





Inefficient and ineffective implementation of income-generating project-stalls for rent 

1)		Past due accounts from rental of stalls amounting to ₱580,346.50 were noted which can be attributed to management’s laxity in monitoring resulting in the accumulation of overdue receivables, the collections therefrom could have been utilized for specific purposes/projects beneficial to the University. 



	1)		 For calendar year 2020, the Audit Team conducted an evaluation of management’s compliance and/or actions taken on the previous audit recommendations discussed in the CY 2019 Annual Audit Report (AAR) relating to the University Income Generating Projects (IGPs), particularly the stalls for lease. 



	7.2	The Audit Team requested from the Office of the Physical Plant and Facilities (OPPF) and the Accounting Office an updated list of stalls for rent constructed at the University main and satellite campuses. Records showed that the total cost spent by the University for the construction of rentable stalls reached to ₱9,402,910.20, the breakdown of which is presented below:

	

Name of Project

Date Completed

Contract Amount

1)	Five (5) Stalls at Evacuation Road (A)

May 28, 2014

₱        689,569.00

2)	Five (5) Stalls at Evacuation Road (B)

July 8, 2014

689,569.00

3)	Rentable Stalls at the Right Side of Guest House 

January 18, 2015

683,451.00

4)	Food Center at Mexico Campus

December 13, 2018

6,775,669.00

5)	Construction of Student Center Extension at the Left Side of Tech-Voc Building at Main Campus 

Various dates in CY 2019

564,652.20

Total



₱     9,402,910.20





	1)	 Review of the Leasehold Agreement showed the following conditions:



a)	The lessee upon execution of the contract pays an amount which corresponds to one (1) month advance rental and two (2) months deposit;



	b) The contract is for a one-year period, renewable upon notice in writing which is given by the lessee to the lessor at least 15 days before the expiry date of the contract;

	

	c) The lessee shall pay the monthly rental and electric consumption within the first seven working days of the succeeding month without any unfavorable delays;

	

	d) The lessee will operate their stall during summer vacation and to be charged half of their monthly rental plus their electricity consumption;

	

	e)	The lessee is responsible for the installation of electric meters and shall pay all charges within the first seven (7) working days of the succeeding month for electric consumption and such other services in the leased premises; installation of the electric meters must be coordinated to the lessor; 

	

	g) In the event the lessee fails to pay the monthly rental for one (1) month, or incurs delay for a period of two (2) months, that will be considered as sufficient ground to terminate the contract, in such case the lessor has the right to lock out the stall and the lessee shall not operate unless such payment is made in full;

	

	i) The lessee is forbidden to assign or transfer his rights as lessee under the contract;

	

	j) The lessee is forbidden to sub-lease the stall to other people; and

	 

		            k) The lessee is prohibited to own more than one stall. 

		

7.4	As of December 31, 2020, records showed that receivables of the University IGPs from 48 stall tenants amounted to ₱580,346.50, as detailed in Appendix F.  A summary of the aging schedule of past due accounts is presented below:



No. of Days

Past Due

No. of Stall Tenants

Amount

91 to 365 days

15

₱ 156,117.11

Over 1 year

13

167,715.33

Over 2 years

3

40,476.06

Over 3 years

17

216,038.00

Total

48

₱ 580,346.50

 

7.5	On the basis of the above data, the past due accounts included more than two months rental arrearages together with unpaid electricity and water bills and those that have ceased operating without settling unpaid accounts after applying their rental deposits and advances.



7.6 	Based on the interviews, review of leasehold contracts, and evaluation of statements of accounts of lessees as well as validation of management’s compliance and actions taken on our prior year’s audit recommendations, we attributed the increase in Receivables to the following circumstances:



a)	Not all delinquent lessees were sent follow-up collection letters.

The Director on Auxiliary Services failed to exert more effort in collecting the outstanding balances of lessees with past due accounts since no follow-up collection letters were sent to them. Some of the delinquent lessees are regular employees of the University. Although these lessees have already closed their businesses, still they are employed in the University and management can easily send communications or reminders regarding their unpaid accounts. 



	b)	Rental rates were not supported with legal basis.

The lessees were engaged in the business of selling food and beverages, office supplies and photocopying machine. The monthly rental fees vary depending on the nature of business of the lessees and the corresponding rates are as follows:

	

	Nature of Business

	Monthly Rental

1)		Meals

	₱5,000.00

	                Nature of Business

	Monthly Rental

2)		 Snacks and beverages

	3,000.00

3)		 Xerox

	                 2,000.00/machine

4)		 E-load

	1,500.00

5)		 School supplies

	3,000.00



The Director of Auxiliary Services informed us that the above monthly rental rates were already the prevailing rates during the time of her predecessor, which she adopted up to the present.



The first and second paragraphs of COA Circular No. 2019-005 dated August 7, 2019 state that:



		Pursuant to Section 7, Executive Order No. 301, series of 1987, the head of any agency intending to lease out government-owned buildings or spaces for private use, shall have authority to determine the reasonableness of the terms of the lease and the rental rates thereof, and to enter into such lease contracts  without need of prior approval of higher authorities, subject to compliance with the uniform standards or guidelines established by the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), and to the audit jurisdiction of the Commission on Audit (COA) or its duly authorized representative, in accordance with existing rules and regulations.



		By virtue of COA Circular No. 88-282A issued on March 3, 1988, this Commission adopted the Uniform Standards/Guidelines to Determine the Reasonableness of the Terms and Rental Rates of Lease Contracts for Private or Government Buildings/Spaces promulgated by the DPWH (Annex “A”) for the guidance of all officials concerned.



Rental rates are considered reasonable when they represent or approximate the value of what the lessee gets in terms of accommodation, facility and convenience from the leased building/space, and the lessor gets equitable return of his capital or investment in the construction and maintenance of the building/space. As such, the absence of a legal basis on the rental rates being implemented by the Director on Auxiliary Services is not in keeping with the provisions of COA Circular No. 2019 - 005. 



	c) There was laxity in monitoring delinquent lessees and in the imposition of sanctions which led to accumulated past due accounts.

				In the analysis of past due accounts, aged more than one year, a total of 33 lessees were found delinquent which could be attributed to the laxity in the implementation of the terms and conditions of the Contract of Lease.  Section 5, Article II thereof specifically states that in the event the lessee fails to pay the monthly rental for one (1) month, or incurs delay for a period of two (2) months, such shall be considered as sufficient ground to terminate the contract, in such case the lessor has the right to lock out the stall and the lessee shall not operate unless such payment is made in full. The Director on Auxiliary Services should have informed the lessees of their failure to comply with the afore-cited provision and the consequence thereof.  Instead, the delinquent lessees were allowed to continue their business in the University stalls which resulted in accumulated past due accounts on rentals and utility bills.

	

7.7	As a consequence, the above lapses contributed to the low collection efficiency on receivable accounts and low return of investment in rentable stalls; thus, the purpose of this income-generating project was not effectively attained. 

	

	7.8	We recommended and the University President agreed to instruct the Director of Auxiliary Services to undertake the following courses of action:

	

a)		send collection and follow-up letters to all delinquent accounts so as to remind them of their unpaid balances;

	

	       b) indicate the basis of computation on the rate of the space rental or derivation of lease rate to be approved by the Board of Regents following the guidelines under COA Circular No. 2019-005.

	

a)		regularly monitor lessees’ accounts especially those with past due accounts to avoid the accumulation of receivables after setting off their advance rental and advance deposits; and

	

b)		enforce strictly the terms and conditions of the agreement and collect fully all the amount due to the University.

		

		

Incomplete Documentation on the Payment of Extra Teaching Load - ₱8,863,050.24  



8.	 The University paid honoraria totaling to ₱8,863,050.24 for Extra Teaching Load (ETL) to its faculty members in the Undergraduate Program without complete documentation contrary to Section 5.7.2 of COA Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012; thus, the propriety and reasonableness thereof could not be established.



8.1	Section 5.7.2 of COA Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012 provides the general guidelines and documentary requirements before payment as follows:



General Guidelines



--	Payment of honoraria to teaching personnel engaged in actual classroom teaching whose teaching load is outside of the regular office hours or in excess of the required load is prescribed under Section 3 of Administrative Order No. 103 dated August 31, 2004.



Documentary Requirements

--	Certification from the Registrar/Dean of College that the load is in excess of the regular load or outside the regular office hours

--	Schedule of classes indicating the designated teaching personnel

--	Certificate of actual conduct of classes and/or Accomplishment Report

--	Approved DTR/Service Report



	1)	In the course of our audit, we noted that the faculty members of the University were paid ETL for School Year (SY) 2019-2020 with a total amount of ₱8,863,050.24 as presented in detail in Appendix G, and summarized below:



Particulars

Amount

Payment of ETL for the first semester SY 2019-2020

₱5,423,051.40

Payment of ETL for the second semester of SY 2019-2020

  3,439,998.84

     Total 

₱8,863,050.24



	2)	Review of the submitted disbursement vouchers (DVs) for the said transactions disclosed that they were not completely supported with the required documents as stated under the afore-cited Circular which provides the general guidelines and documentary requirements on the payment of honoraria of SUCs teaching personnel. The supporting documents submitted to support the claim were Daily Time Records (DTRs), payrolls, and Summary of Faculty Members with Extra Teaching Load by Semester.



8.4	One of the fundamental principles governing the financial transactions and operations of any government agency is that claims against government funds shall be supported with complete documentation. Recalculation of the ETL could not be performed by the Audit Team without the complete set of documents as cited in the aforementioned COA Circular.



	8.5	Due to the above lapses, the propriety and reasonableness of the subject payments could not be established. 

	

8.6	We recommended and the University President agreed through the Vice President for Academic Affairs (VPAA) to require all those concerned to submit the required supporting documents for payment of extra teaching loads in compliance with Section 5.7.2 of COA Circular No. 2012-001.





Compliance of the curricular programs to the CHED policies, standards, and guidelines 



	9. 	Out of the 34 curricular programs offered by the University, 25 were aligned with the mandate explicitly mentioned in Section 3 of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 9832; 25 were included in the listed priority course as identified in the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) Memorandum Order (CMO) no. 05, series of 2019; and 17 have yet to undergo the required independent accreditation under CMO No. 01, series of 2005; thus, raising doubt on the capacity of the University to institutionalize its mandate of spearheading socio-economic development in the locality by producing job-ready graduates from specialized/relevant programs.

	

9.1      Pursuant to Republic Act (R.A.) No. 9832 dated December 9, 2009, the Don Honorio Ventura College of Arts and Trades (DHVCAT) in the Municipality of Bacolor, Province of Pampanga was converted into a State University. Under Section 2 of R.A. No. 9832, it states that the university shall primarily provide advanced training education, engineering, science and technology, arts and humanities, computer and other relevant fields of study. It shall also undertake research, extension services and production activities in support of the socioeconomic development of Pampanga and provide leadership in its areas of specialization.



		9.2 	Also, Commission on Higher Education (CHED) Memorandum Order (CMO) No. 5 series of 2019, dated August 16, 2019 identities priority courses for CHED Scholarship Programs (CSPs) for Academic Year 2019-2020 aligned with global innovation platforms of Science, Technology, Agri-Fisheries, and Mathematics (STEAM).  There was no issuance from CHED updating the list of priority courses for AY 2020-2021 to date.

		

	9.3	We obtained a List of the Undergraduate Curricular Programs offered by the University for Academic Year (AY) 2020-2021 and records showed that the University has 34 curriculum programs for the Undergraduate School. The curriculum program is classified under eight colleges; namely, 



--	College of Engineering and Architecture

--	College of Arts and Sciences

--	College of Business Studies

--	College of Computing Studies

--	College of Education

--	College of Hospitality and Management

--	College of Industrial Technology

--	College of Social sciences and Philosophy

 

9.4	Review of the alignment of curricular programs offered with the mandate of the University showed that 25 of the 34 undergraduate curriculum programs offered by the University for AY 2019-2020 and AY 2020-2021 or 74% were properly aligned with those stated in the University mandate. The graph in the succeeding page presents the curricular programs which are the fields of concentration pursuant to the above mandate of the University.





Figure I

:

Alignment of mandate explicitly mentioned in Section 2 of R.A. No. 9832 to the curricular programs currently offered by the University of which nine (Others) or 26% were not aligned.

			

		9.5	Section 3 of R.A. No. 9832 states that the University shall offer undergraduate and graduate courses in the fields of education, engineering, science and technology, arts and humanities, computer and other degree courses within its areas of specialization and according to its capabilities, as the Board of Regents may deem necessary to carry out its objectives and in order to meet the needs of the Province of Pampanga and Region III. The curriculum programs on BS Engineering, BS information Technology,	BS Education, BS Industrial Technology, BS Business Administration, Entrepreneurship, and BS Information Management were already offered even prior to its conversion of the School into a State College in 2009. The same programs were carried over when the same was converted into a State University in 2009.



		9.6	Likewise, a comparison of the offered curricular programs of the University with the priority courses listed in CMO No. 5 series of 2019 revealed that 16 curricular programs under various platforms of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) were included in the priority courses listed by CHED. Also, nine curriculum programs were included in other priority courses aligned in key growth areas such as Business Administration and Hospitality Management. The other nine curricular programs in the field of teacher education, social sciences, and philosophy were included in the previously issued courses under CMO No. 01 series of 2014; however, these were already excluded in the recently issued priority courses for CHED Scholarship Programs. (CSPs). Presented in Appendix H is the list of undergraduate curricular programs offered by the University and its alignment with the university mandate and the priority courses pursuant to CMO No. 05, series of 2019.



	9.7	The following graphical presentation shows the alignment of the priority courses pursuant to the foregoing CMO; however, nine program offerings or 26% were found misaligned, such as teacher education, social sciences and philosophy.





	

Figure 2

:

Alignment of priority courses as identified in CMO No. 05, Series of 2019 to the curricular programs currently offered by the University of which nine (teacher education and those not listed) or 26% were not aligned.

	

9.8	Also, Part I, paragraph 3 of CMO No. 5 states that Students who are enrolled in any of the priority courses listed in this CMO may avail of the benefits under the CSPs, depending on the type of scholarships they were able to qualify, which shall be in the form of tuition and stipend. The financial assistance under the CSPs shall be harmonized with the monetary benefits under the Unified Student Financial Assistance System for Tertiary Education-Tertiary Education Subsidy (UniFAST-TES), as well as with the free tuition and other school fees privilege provided in Republic Act No. 10931, the Universal Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act (UAQTEA).



9.9	Seemingly, the intent of CMO No. 05 s. 2019 is to encourage incoming college students to take up priority courses for them to avail of financial assistance from CHED and be gainfully employed later in in-demand jobs that could boost the national economic growth. As such, the University can help the CHED in the implementation of this Memorandum by encouraging incoming college students to enroll in any of the priority courses listed in the CMO where they may qualify to avail of the benefits under the CSPs which shall be in the form of free tuition and stipend. Also, the CHED identified priority courses which may be directed to national development plan on manpower demands and the non-adherence to the list of courses might lead to lower chance of employability of graduates.  



9.10	In the meantime, CMO No. 01, series of 2005, dated February 15, 2005, otherwise known as the Revised Policies and Guidelines on Voluntary Accreditation in Aid of Quality and Excellence in Higher Education, emphasizes the encouragement of the use of voluntary non-governmental accreditation systems. Accreditation, as defined in Article II of the CMO, is a process of assessing and upgrading the educational quality of higher education institutions and programs through self-evaluation and peer judgment. It leads to the grant of accredited status by an accredited agency and provides public recognition and information on educational quality. Accordingly, the Accrediting Agency of Chartered Colleges and Universities in the Philippines (AACCUP), being one of the accrediting agencies that caters the accreditation of curricular programs, was commissioned by the University. The accreditation level of the University will be used by the CHED and the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) in recommending budgetary allocation as stated on Item B, Article V of the said CMO. 



9.11	For higher education institutions (HEIs), the biggest single index of quality assured academic programs is their accreditation status and commitment to sustain and upgrade the same. Presently, the AACCUP has awarded to the University ten Level 2 re-accredited status, five Level 1 re-accredited status and three Level 3 re-accredited status, the latter being expired as of October 15, 2015 and May, 2020 as shown in Appendix I. It was also noted that out of the present 34 curricular programs of the University, only 18 curricular programs have undergone accreditation. Meanwhile 17 curricular programs of the University have yet to undergo independent accreditation from the AACUP, as follows:



		Curricular Programs

1)		Bachelor of Science in Biology

2)	Bachelor of Science in Environmental Science

3)	Bachelor of science in Mathematics

4)	Bachelor of Science in Statistics

5)	Bachelor of Science in Accountancy

6)	Bachelor of Science in Accounting Information System

7)	Bachelor of Science in Accounting Technology

8)	Bachelor in Public Administration

9)	Bachelor of Science in Computer Engineering

10)	Bachelor of Science in Computer Science

11)	Bachelor of Science in Information System

12)	Associate in Computer Technology

13)	Bachelor of Technology and Livelihood Education

14)	Bachelor of Science in Hospitality Management

15)	Bachelor of Science in Tourism Management

16)	Bachelor of Science in Sociology

17)	Bachelor of Science in Human Services

9.12	 The above curricular programs are relatively new programs which are not qualified for AACCUP accreditation since it is a requisite that the aforementioned produce graduates first.



9.13	Quality and excellence in higher education cannot be measured alone by the learning outputs of the students as these are not the only indicators of the status of a higher education institution (HEI). Inputs such as quality of teaching, curricular revisions, facilities, infrastructures, and support services are necessary to constantly assess and upgrade existing programs as against the quality standards in order for HEIs to keep abreast of the latest demands of the country.



9.14	Confronted with the unresolved gaps between the currently offered curricular programs and the list of priority courses of CHED and its accreditation requirements, effort towards educational reforms may be inadequate to institutionalize the mandate of the University in spearheading socio-economic development in the locality of Pampanga by producing quality graduates of relevant academic courses and professional degrees.



	9.15	We recommended and the University President agreed to (a) require the Vice President for Academic Affairs (VPAA) to advise students during registration and enrolment to take priority courses for them to avail of the CSPs; and (b) direct the Director for Quality Assurance to (i) monitor closely the lapsed accreditation statuses of different programs for updating or upgrading on or before their expiration; and (ii) ascertain that all curricular programs are subjected to AACCUP accreditation as soon as graduates are produced in order to enjoy the benefits thereon.





Performance in licensure examinations and employability of the graduates



10.	 The University Passing Rates (UPRs) obtained by the Don Honorio Ventura State University (DHVSU) on eight out of nine licensure examinations given during the years 2016 to 2020 were mostly below the National Passing Rates (NPRs), thus, casting doubt on the capability of the University to produce professionals from among its graduates, especially in the fields of Engineering, Architecture, Education, Psychometrician and Social Work. On the other hand, based on the latest monitoring done by the different offices of the Dean, out of 3,618 graduates in CY 2018, about 2,610 were employed, 204 were unemployed while the status of the remaining 804 were untracked in view of unreliable tool in the gathering and consolidation of data. Nonetheless, the number of unemployed which constitutes 5.64% of the graduates in the same batch still created a negative impact on the realization of its mandate to produce competitive and empowered individuals.



10.1	Don Honorio Ventura State University (DHVSU), formerly known as Don Honorio Ventura College of Arts and Trade (DHVCAT) under Presidential Decree (P.D.) No. 1373 was converted into a State University by virtue of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 9832 dated December 9, 2009. The mandates of DHVSU are to provide advanced training education, engineering, science and technology, arts and humanities, computer and other relevant fields of study, undertake research, extension services and production activities in support of the socio-economic development and provide leadership in these areas. 



10.2	To ensure that the State Universities and Colleges (SUCs) could keep up with the top universities here in the Philippines and other countries, the Department of Budget and Management (DBM)-Commission on Higher Education (CHED) Joint Circular (JC) No. 1 series of 2016 dated April 13, 2016 provides the leveling instrument for SUCs and the standard to measure their institutional performance. The SUCs leveling shall be undertaken every three years. There shall be five levels with Level V as the highest which is described as a level comparable to the best universities or colleges in Asia. At present, the University holds SUC Level III status per CHED Memorandum Order (CMO) No. 09, series of 2019, dated September 11, 2019. One of the Key Result Areas (KRAs) that measure the stages of development and institutional performance of the respective SUCs is the quality and relevance of instructions and two of its sub-indicators are the performance in licensure/board examination and the employability of its graduates. 



10.3	The University has four curricular programs that undergo ten professional licensure examinations administered by the Professional Regulations Commission (PRC). The curricular programs offered with board examination are the following:



1)	College of Business Studies

--	Bachelor of Science in Accountancy



2)	College of Education

--	Bachelor of Elementary Education

--	Bachelor of Secondary Education



3)	College of Engineering and Architecture

--	Bachelor of Science in Architecture

--	Bachelor of Science in Civil Engineering

--	Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering

--	Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering

--	Bachelor of Science in Electronics Engineering



4)	College of Social Sciences and Philosophy

--	Bachelor of Science in Social Work

--	Bachelor of Science in Psychology



10.4	The Audit Team conducted a review of the performance of the University graduates in the nine licensure examinations for the five-year period covering 2016 to 2020. However, for Bachelor of Science in Accountancy no board examination has been taken yet since its pioneer graduates are currently taking up their review for their board examination which was re-scheduled in May 2021 due to the pandemic situation.  Based on the data gathered, the University Passing Rate (UPR) on overall performance on nine licensure examinations taken by its graduates were mostly below the National Passing Rate (NPR) except for Professional Elementary Teachers which consistently surpassed the NPR. Details are presented in Appendix J and summarized as follows:



 

 



Licensure Examination

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020





UPR

NPR

UPR

NPR

UPR

NPR

UPR

NPR

UPR

NPR

1

Architecture

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



1st Semester

34.29%

55.66%

45.65%

57.62%

52.05%

57.60%

55.56%

56.28%

44.74%

55.72%

 

2nd Semester

50.91%

55.89%

52.38%

55.62%

40.21%

55.96%

59.78%

66.33%

 

 



Special Exam.













66.67%

66.39%





2

Civil Engineering

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



1st Semester

40.58%

38.17%

33.71%

35.92%

27.03%

36.03%

24.11%

38.08%

 

 

 

2nd Semester

48.73%

45.90%

51.95%

48.80%

42.86%

45.09%

39.96%

43.18%

 

 

3

Electronics Engineering

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



1st Semester

30.77%

36.95%

28.13%

41.27%

38.46%

45.36%

59.09%

48.92%





 

2nd Semester

33.75%

40.36%

42.68%

46.70%

45.00%

49.50%

29.52%

49.42%

 

 

4

Electrical Engineering

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



1st Semester

21.43%

41.29%

15.00%

44.92%

33.33%

52.12%

37.50%

62.79%





 

2nd Semester

63.93%

68.46%

61.97%

62.90%

43.88%

66.70%

44.71%

67.16%

 

 



Special Exam.









40.00%

28.40%









5

Mechanical Engineering

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



1st Semester

19.23%

55.32%

23.81%

56.88%

11.76%

47.05%

6.90%

50.49%

5.26%

38.45%

 

2nd Semester

47.41%

69.57%

42.86%

68.99%

43.30%

60.82%

45.34%

70.60%

 

 

6

Professional Teachers (Elementary)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



1st Semester

45.65%

28.38%

22.69%

10.39%

33.33%

23.62%

36.89%

27.28%





 

2nd Semester

38.03%

30.18%

31.60%

26.33%

21.80%

20.29%

37.82%

31.34%

 

 

7

Professional Teachers (Secondary)























1st Semester

26.36%

35.43%

19.02%

25.46%

19.13%

29.91%

17.46%

25.95%







2nd Semester

31.83%

33.78%

44.21%

46.37%

44.00%

48.03%

32.09%

39.68%

2020





Licensure Examination

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020





UPR

NPR

UPR

NPR

UPR

NPR

UPR

NPR

UPR

NPR

7

Professional Teachers (Secondary)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



1st Semester

26.36%

35.43%

19.02%

25.46%

19.13%

29.91%

17.46%

25.95%





 

2nd Semester

31.83%

33.78%

44.21%

46.37%

44.00%

48.03%

32.09%

39.68%

 

 

8

Psychometricians

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2nd Semester

* 

* 

52.17%

56.97%

39.13%

47.73%

51.28%

63.73%

 

 

9

Social Worker

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2nd Semester

*

*

73.13%

65.88%

40.00%

49.96%

44.44%

46.30%

 

 



Notes:

1. Percentages highlighted refer to UPRs higher than the NPRs.



2.. *No licensure examination, pioneer graduates took the board on AY 2017 onward.



3.  Due to government-imposed restrictions and other unforeseeable circumstances due to community quarantine all over the country, the conduct of the licensure examinations from March to December 2020 were postponed. As such, only two licensure examinations, namely, Architecture and Mechanical Engineering was taken by the University graduates for AY 2020.



10.5	Based on the University records, there were 11,406 graduates who applied for licensure examinations on various courses for the last four years. From the total examinees, a total of 4,199 or 36.81% passed the licensure board examinations on education, engineering, architecture, psychometrician and social work as presented in Appendix J. Special Examinations for Architecture and Electrical Engineering were administered by the PRC for overseas workers in the Middle East in CYs 2019 and 2018. We also learned from the Deans of Colleges concerned that one factor for the low UPR was the open admission policy implemented during the past administration in which non-qualified freshmen were admitted to enroll in a Program despite an existing selection procedure. Other causes are over populated classes and poor study habits among students.  The University also received assessment reports from the review centers during the review period informing the unsatisfactory results of the pre-board exams of their graduates due to lack of focus on their review.  We have also learned from the University officials that this may be due to inadequacy of the University to strengthen the implementation of pre-board examinations in order to enhance the performances of would-be takers.



10.6	The low performance of the University in the licensure examinations resulted to low production of professionals. The failure to surpass the NPR in various fields, shows that there is a need for the University to improve its strategies, reinforce more quality program instructions, and improve the learning environment, such as facilities.



10.7	 According to the Deans of Colleges, the University has already initiated intervention measures by different colleges with board programs like inclusion of intensive review in the fourth and fifth year of the students, alignment of examination items on content standards of board examination, among others. 



10.8	Despite the low UPR, 14 examinees managed to occupy high ranks in their respective licensure examination as enumerated below:



 

Name of Graduate

Licensure Examination

Date of Examination

Rank

1

Geomel B. Juan

Registered Mechanical Engineer

September 2016

2

2

Ron Lester C. Mallari

Registered Mechanical Engineer

September 2016

9

3

Reinier L. Grospe

Registered Social Worker

July 2017

10

4

Dee Jay M. Sibug

Registered Mechanical Engineer

September 2017

3

5

James Ian D. Fauni

Registered Electronics Engineer

October 2017

7

6

Rez Christian M. Panganiban

Registered Civil Engineer

November 2017

6

7

Jessie James P. Figuracion

Registered Civil Engineer

November 2017

10

8

Vir Angelo E. Manalo

Registered Electronics Engineer

October 2018

9

9

Andrea C. Buan

Registered Psychometrician

October 2018

10

10

Jan Lawrence T. Alberto

Registered Civil Engineer

November 2018

5

11

Redentor Lobo Mirano Jr

Registered Architect

June 2019

5

12

Jeffrey Maun Musngi

Registered Architect

August 2019

5

13

James Patrick Angeles Pangan

Registered Architect

August 2019

6

14

Resuression S. David

Registered Teacher

August 2019

9

 

10.9	 As regards the employment status of the graduates, the Deans of Colleges conduct annual monitoring of the graduates two years after graduation. The tracer studies on employment of graduates obtained from the Dean of Colleges were consolidated by the Director of Planning and Development. For the current year, the employability report on individual graduates of CY 2018 showed information such as their company, status of employment and length of service.  The Audit Team requested employment data on the university graduates, however, a consolidated report on tracer studies submitted by the Offices of the College Dean was given to the Audit Team. The consolidated data are presented in Appendix K and summarized in the table next page: 

 







Program Name

No. of Graduate 

(FY 2018)





Employed





Unemployed





Untracked/

Undetermined

Main Campus









College of Business Studies

518

411

69

38

College of Engineering and Architecture

964

727

21

216

College of Social Sciences and Philosophy

164

145

14

5

College of Hospitality and Management

224

148

6

70

College of Industrial Technology

246

210

4

32

College of Education

798

500

57

241

College of Computing Science

275

209

3

63

Extension Campuses









Mexico Campus

124

93

8

23

Porac Campus

127

84

6

37

Sto. Tomas

178

83

16

79

Total

3,618

2,610

204

804

Percentage

100.00%

72.14%

5.64%

22.22%



10.10	The Director of Planning and Development Office (PDO) informed us that another reason for the unemployment of graduates was due to competition from other universities and that their course was not aligned to the job applied for. For graduates under untracked, these referred to those who did not reply to the survey conducted by the Dean of Colleges. 



10.11	We also gathered that the Director for Admissions, Guidance, Testing and Career Services launched programs, such as job fairs, pre-employment orientation seminar and linkages with private companies and government agencies, to support the graduating students with their employment application process after graduation and licensure examinations. Likewise, duly organized activities, including referrals to recruitment activities, job vacancy postings in the University official website and social media platforms are being undertaken by the office concerned. The said programs had facilitated the application process of the graduates on job opportunities relevant to their respective programs, thus, helping them obtain jobs which will boost the image of the University in return.       



10.12	 We commend the University particularly the Director for Admissions, Guidance, Testing and Career Service for conducting programs to support the graduating students.



10.13	Notwithstanding, there are areas still wanting of improvement particularly on how to upgrade the level of competitiveness among University graduates in all national licensure examinations and be at the top in every job opportunity locally and abroad. 



10.14	We recommended and the University President agreed to require the Vice President for Student Affairs (VPAA) to (a) take a study on the causes identified for the low performance in licensure examinations, especially for degrees with in-demand jobs such as Engineering, Architecture, Education, Psychometrician and Social Worker; (b) adopt applicable interventions to raise the UPR and make the University at par with other reputable learning institutions locally and in other countries to level up with the CHED standard for SUCs; (c) assign one specific office that will monitor and consolidate the report on the employability of the graduates which can be used effectively by the offices concerned for planning purposes and development of enhanced strategies; and (d) encourage all program deans to conduct in-depth studies on the employability of their respective graduates and submit the same to the Office in charge of consolidation. The study will provide valuable inputs to the Admissions, Guidance, Testing and Career Service Office on the proper matching of skills/competence with job opportunities at hand. Accordingly, the percentage of employment of graduates will increase.



Partial implementation of GAD Plan and Budget



11. 	 University funds amounting to ₱17,252,955.15 or 43.81% of the total annual appropriations for Gender and Development (GAD) of ₱39,379,693.50 were expended for planned programs/projects/activities (PPAs) that truly addressed the gender issues of the teachers, non-teaching personnel, and students in accordance with Joint Circular (JC) No. 2012-01 of the Philippine Commission on Women (PCW), Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA). However, the remaining 56.19% remained unutilized, resulting in unimplemented PPAs; thus, the GAD objectives were not substantially attained.   



11.1	Joint Circular No. 2012-01 of the Philippine Commission on Women (PCW), Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) states that pursuant to the Magna Carta of Women (MCW) and the General Appropriations Act (GAA), all government departments, including their attached agencies, offices, bureaus, state universities and colleges (SUCs), government-owned and controlled corporations (GOCCs), local government units (LGUs) and other government instrumentalities shall formulate their annual GAD plans and budgets within the context of their mandates to mainstream gender perspectives in their policies, programs and budgets. GAD Planning shall be integrated in the regular activities of the agencies, the cost of implementation of which shall be at least five percent (5%) of their total budgets. The computation and utilization shall be implemented in accordance with the specific guidelines provided therein.



11.2	In CY 2020, the Gender and Development (GAD) Office of the University formulated a GAD Plan to address gender issues such as gender-responsive governance, protection and fulfillment of women’s human rights, and promotion of women’s economic empowerment.  These plans are embedded in the University mandate and various programs pursuant to S.O. 12 Advocate Gender and Development Initiatives. 



11.3 	At the onset, review of the University’s GAD Accomplishment Report (GAD-AR) for the year showed that the amount of ₱39,379,693.50 or 12.36% of its actual appropriations of ₱318,550,000.00 was provided for its GAD budget as shown in   Appendix L. Of the total GAD budget, only ₱17,252,955.15 or 5.42% of the total appropriation was utilized for GAD activities exceeding the minimum requirements set forth in the afore-cited laws and regulations as shown in Appendix M. 



11.4	As shown in the year-end accomplishment report, despite the pandemic situation, the University was able to address its GAD Plans. The present situation did not hamper the University from extending the GAD advocacy to its administrative and academic personnel together with the students both at the main and satellite campuses. The GAD-related activities were conducted through social media which made GAD advocacy alive in the whole University. Based on the GAD Plan and Budget (GPB) approved by the PCW on October 14, 2020, the following are the programs/projects/activities that were initiated during the year; viz:



GAD Activities

Amount

A)	Client-Focused Activities



1)	Conduct impact assessment and analysis of GAD initiatives and efforts among stakeholders

₱        342,834.10

2)	Utilization of university website, social media and school organ for GAD advocacy

15,520.00

3)	Conduct Seminar and Workshop addressing gender sensitivity and equality among first year college students, transferees, returnees, shifters, grade 7 and 11 pupils and graduate school students

23,485.92

B)	Organization-Focused Activities



4)	Conduct GST (gender sensitivity trainings) and mainstreaming among DHVSU personnel on the principles of gender concepts, tools and policies 

627,357.52

5)	De-loading of teachers/instructors and non-teaching personnel to work on the GAD initiatives, monitoring and implementation of programs

No cost involved

De-loading of teacher-GADFP, Assistants and non-teaching  personnel

542,263.00

Conduct capacity development to DHVSU employees and students to continue its efforts to further strengthen and intensify GAD mainstreaming initiatives thru conduct of seminars, training and workshops on GPB, GAR and GAD Agenda 

412,751.50

Consultative training-workshop for university officials and faculty on GAD mainstreaming

117,791.09

Conduct lectures/forums regarding the celebration of National Women’s month, 18-Day Campaign to EVAW and other relevant activities  

7,042,289.00

Fully operational GAD Wellness Center intended to address and provide support to employees and students with gender-related concern like breastfeeding area, child minding area, sickbay, and administrative office

1,203,600.00

Consultative sessions and specific activities for GFPS members (i.e. formulation of the GAD Agenda, Strategic Plans, Programs, Projects and Activities)

33,503.09

Attendance and active participation in the GAD related initiatives of the different linkages and agencies

7,559.93

C)	Attributed Program



 PWD and All-Gender Restrooms and other projects for improvement of facilities

6,884,000.00

           Total

₱      17,252,955.15

	

	11.5 	The University maintains a compilation of sex-disaggregated data which it used to determine the required intervention to address the gender issues evolving among the students, professors, and non-teaching personnel. For instance, in GAD Activity A.3, various students in different academic levels underwent gender sensitivity training to promote gender equality in terms of opportunity for growth and development. 

	

	11.6	Likewise, the Harmonized Gender and Development Guidelines (HGDG) was adopted to promote gender mainstreaming in all phases of management, such as planning, monitoring and decision-making.  

	

	11.7	Nevertheless, the remaining budget of P22,126,738.35 or 56.19% was not utilized during the year resulting in the non-implementation of vital projects/activities as follows: 

		

	Programs/Projects/Activities

	Estimated Budget

	Unutilized Fund Balance

	Status as of 

	December 31, 2020

	Conduct impact assessment and analysis of GAD initiatives and efforts among stakeholders

	₱ 570,000.00

	₱ 227,165.90

	Partially Implemented

	Utilization of university website, social media and school organ for GAD advocacy

	360,000.00

	344,480.00

	Partially Implemented

	Conduct Seminar and Workshop addressing gender sensitivity and equality among first year college students, transferees, returnees, shifters, grade 7 and 11 pupils and graduate school students

	3,000,000.00

	2,976,514.08

	Partially Implemented

	Conduct GST (gender sensitivity trainings) and mainstreaming among DHVSU personnel on the principles of gender concepts, tools and policies

	4,510,000.00

	3,882,642.48

	Partially Implemented

	De-loading of teachers/instructors and non-teaching personnel to work on the GAD initiatives, monitoring and implementation of programs

	5,000,000.00

	5,000,000.00

	Deferred Implementation

	De-loading of teacher-GADFP, Assistants and non-teaching personnel

	1,000,000.00

	457,737.00

	

	Partially Implemented

	Conduct capacity development to DHVSU employees and students to continue its efforts to further strengthen and intensify GAD mainstreaming initiatives thru conduct of seminars, training and workshops on GPB, GAR and GAD Agenda 

	4,500,000.00

	4,087,248.50

	Partially Implemented

	Consultative training-workshop for university officials and faculty on GAD mainstreaming

	3,560,000.00

	3,442,208.91

	Partially Implemented

	Conduct lectures/forums regarding the celebration of National Women’s month, 18-Day Campaign to EVAW and other relevant activities  

	2,415,000.00

	(4,627,289.00)

	Fully Implemented

	Fully operational GAD Wellness Center intended to address and provide support to employees and students with gender-related concern like breastfeeding area, child minding area, sickbay, and administrative office

	7,000,000.00

	5,796,400.00

	Partially Implemented

	Consultative sessions and specific activities for GFPS members (i.e. formulation of the GAD Agenda, Strategic Plans, Programs, Projects and Activities)

	3,560,000.00

	3,526,496.91

	Partially Implemented

	Attendance and active participation in the GAD related initiatives of the different linkages and agencies

	2,350,000.00

	2,342,440.07

	Partially Implemented

	PWD and All-Gender Restrooms and Other Facilities Project

	1,554,693.50

	(5,329,306.50)

	Fully Implemented

	Total 

	P 39,379,693.50

	P 22,126,738.35

	

	

	11.8 	It is worth mentioning though that GAD is a continuous process and there is still much room for improvement in order for the University to maximize the use of the GAD budget in the ensuing years.  

	 

	11.9	We recommended and the management agreed to continuously exert effort to (a) promote GAD initiatives in accordance with its mandate; (b) revisit the identified gender issues and introduce relevant programs/projects/activities that could significantly and consistently contribute to women empowerment and gender equality in consonance with PCW JC No. 2012-01; and (c) maximize the use of GAD funds to substantially finance gender concerns of students, teachers and non-teaching personnel.                                                                      



	   

Enforcement of Audit Suspensions, Disallowances and Charges



12.	There were no unsettled notices of suspensions, disallowances and charges at the end of calendar year 2020.





Compliance with Tax Laws and Regulations



13.	The University consistently complied with the BIR regulations with respect to the remittance of taxes withheld from the salaries and wages of its employees and claims of suppliers/contractors, leaving an unremitted amount of ₱7,323,167.44 which only pertained to taxes withheld in December 2020.



13.1 	For calendar year 2020, the University withheld a total amount of ₱52,975,817.33 as taxes from salaries/wages of employees and claims of suppliers/contractors while a sum of ₱49,601,405.06 was remitted to the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) through Tax Remittance Advices (TRAs) per Revenue Regulation No. 14-2002 dated September 9, 2002 and Revenue Memorandum Circular No. 5-2006 dated November 2, 2005. The unremitted amount of ₱7,323,167.44 as of December 31, 2020 was remitted in January, 2020. (Appendix N).



13.2 	We commended the Management for the consistent compliance with the aforesaid revenue regulations.

 

13.3	We recommended and the management agreed to continue to comply with the revenue regulations particularly on the proper withholding and prompt remittance of taxes to the BIR, thus, contributing to the revenues of the government.

	

	

	Compliance with RA No. 8291 or the GSIS Act of 1991

	

	14.      GSIS premiums/contributions and loan amortizations deducted/withheld from salaries and wages of the University personnel, together with the employer’s share, were fully remitted to the System in accordance with Section 6(b) of R.A. No. 8291, otherwise known as the Government Service Insurance System (GSIS) Act of 1991.

	

	14.1     Section 6, paragraph (b) of R.A. No. 8291 dated May 30, 1997 otherwise known as the GSIS Act of 1997 states that each employer shall remit directly to the GSIS the employees’ and employers’ contribution within the first ten (10) days of the calendar month following the month to which the contributions apply. The remittance by the employer of the contributions to the GSIS shall take priority over and above the payment of any and all obligations except salaries and wages of its employees. 

		

		14.2    Verification from the records of the Accounting Division showed that the GSIS premiums and loan amortizations deducted from the salaries of the University’s officials and employees as well as the corresponding premiums for Government Share totaling to ₱38,919,373.23 were in accordance with the rates and regulations imposed under R.A. No. 8291. The amount of ₱38,964,852.07 was remitted to the GSIS in accordance with the same Act. Thus, leaving an unremitted amount of ₱880.50 (Appendix O). This amount was part of the deducted premium during the month of December 2020, which will be remitted in the ensuing month.

		

		14.3    We recommended and the management agreed to continue its good practice of strict compliance with the provisions of R.A No. 8291, prescribing the prompt remittance to the GSIS of premiums/contributions and loan amortizations withheld from personnel compensation.  





Compliance with R.A. No. 9679 or the Pag-IBIG Fund Law



15.    The University was notably compliant with the provisions of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 9679 on the proper deduction and timely remittance of Pag-IBIG Fund contributions and short-term loan amortizations of personnel. 



15.1	During the year 2020, the University was substantially compliant with the provisions of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 9679 which requires the proper deduction and timely remittance of Pag-IBIG Fund contributions and loan amortizations of personnel as shown in the table below:





Date

Deducted/

Withheld



Remitted

Unremitted 

End of Month

Beg. Bal.-Dec. 31, 2019





₱1,665.84

January, 2020

₱394,374.88

₱394,223.10

1,817.62

February

393,402.07

393,376.68

1,843.01

March

402,206.51

402,781.88

1,267.64

April

338,671.18

333,106.86

			6,831.96

May

329,984.12

329,893.92

6,922.16

June

348,561.55

354,116.07

1,367.64

July

329,023.82

301,713.95

28,677.51

August

359,175.29

386,785.16

1,067.64

September

339,232.03

337,898.30

2,401.37

October

147,756.49

146,956.49

3,735.10

November

385,946.46

328,069.42

61,612.14

December

483,506.01

538,710.73

6,407.42

Total

₱4,251,840.41

₱4,247,632.56

₱5,873.69



15.2 The unremitted balance of ₱5,873.00 was an over deduction of Multi-Purpose Loan; thus, the amount is due for refund on the following month.



15.3 We recommended and the management agreed to continuously withhold the appropriate amounts of contributions and loan amortizations from the salaries of the University personnel, and make prompt remittance of the amounts withheld to the HDMF in accordance with the payment schedule.















38









