














































Management Letter


1 

 

Republic of the Philippines 

COMMISSION ON AUDIT 
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT SECTOR 

Cluster I –Executive Offices 

Commonwealth Avenue, Quezon City 

 

     

June 11, 2021 

 

 

Atty. JEREMIAH B. BELGICA  

Director General 

4th & 5th Floor, NFA Building 

NFA Compound, Visayas Avenue 

Brgy. Vasra, Diliman, Quezon City  

 

 

Dear Director General Belgica: 

 

 

Management Letter on the Audit of the 

ANTI-RED TAPE AUTHORITY 

for the Period January 1 to December 31, 2020 

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION 
 

1. Pursuant to Section 2, Article IX-D of the Constitution of the Philippines and 
Section 43 of the Government Auditing Code of the Philippines, Presidential 

Decree (PD) No. 1445, we are mandated to audit the accounts and operations of 

the Anti-Red Tape Authority (ARTA) for the period ended December 31, 2020. 

The audit should have been conducted in accordance with applicable legal 

requirements and the International Public Sector Accounting Standards.  Those 

standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain a reasonable basis 

for our conclusions. 

 

2. The audit aimed to (a) verify the level of assurance that may be placed on 
management’s assertions on the balances of accounts recorded in the agency 

books; (b) determine extent of compliance with laws, rules and regulations; (c) 

recommend agency improvement opportunities; and (d) determine the extent of 

implementation of prior years’ audit recommendations. 

 

3. Due to the non-submission of financial reports and documents, the Audit team 
was not able to conduct timely review of the transactions and accounts of the 

agency for the year. The presence of scope limitation greatly affected the annual 

audit performed by the Audit Team.   

 

 

 



2 

 

4. Deficiencies observed in the course of the audit have been communicated 
through Audit Observation Memoranda (AOM) and have been discussed with 

the concerned ARTA officials and employees. Their comments have been 

incorporated in this letter, where appropriate.   

 

 

I. BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
 

5. The ARTA was created by virtue of Republic Act (RA) No. 11032, known as 
the “Ease of Doing Business and Efficient Government Services Delivery Act 

(EODB/EDGSA) of 2018.” 

 

6. It is mandated to administer and implement the said law and its Implementing 
Rules and Regulations, and to monitor and ensure compliance with the national 

policy on anti-red tape and ease of doing business in the country 

 

7. The ARTA has the following powers and functions: 
 

a. Implement and oversee a national policy on anti-red tape and ease of doing 
business; 

 

b. Implement various ease of doing business and anti-red tape reform 
initiatives aimed at improving the ranking of the Philippines; 

 

c. Monitor and evaluate the compliance of agencies covered under Section 3 
of this Act, and issue notice of warning to erring and/or non-complying 

government employees or officials; 

 

d. Initiate investigation, motu proprio or upon receipt of a complaint, refer the 
same to the appropriate agency, or file cases for violations of this Act; 

 

e. Assist complainants in filing necessary cases before the Civil Service 
Commission (CSC), the Ombudsman and other appropriate courts, as the 

case may be; 

 

f.     Recommend policies, processes and systems to improve regulatory 
management to increase the productivity, efficiency, and effectiveness of 

business permitting and licensing agencies; 

 

g. Review proposed major regulations of government agencies, using 
submitted regulatory impact assessments, subject to proportionality rules to 

be determined by the Authority; 

 

h. Conduct regulatory management training programs to capacitate National 
Government Agencies (NGAs) and Local Government Units (LGUs) to 

comply with sound regulatory management practices; 

 

i.     Prepare, in consultation with the appropriate agencies, regulatory 
management manuals for all government agencies and/or instrumentalities 

and LGUs; 



3 

 

 

j.      Provide technical assistance and advisory opinions in the review of 
proposed national or local legislation, regulations or procedures; 

 

k. Ensure the dissemination of and public access to information on regulatory 
management system and changes in laws and regulations relevant to the 

public by establishing the Philippine Business Regulations Information 

System; 

 

l.     Enlist the assistance of the CSC, DTI and other government agencies in the 
implementation of its powers and functions provided for in this Act; and 

 

m. Perform such acts as may be necessary to attain the objectives of EODB. 
 

8. The Agency is headed by a Director General (DG) appointed by the President 
of the Philippines, and such appointment shall be coterminous with the latter’s 

tenure. The DG shall enjoy the benefits, privileges, and emoluments 

equivalent to the rank of Secretary and is assisted by three Deputy DGs for 

legal, operations, and administration and finance. 

 

 

Operational Highlights 

 

9. Shown in the Table below were the agency’s operational highlights as reported 
in the Physical Report of Operation as of December 31, 2020: 

 

Programs/ 

Projects/ 

Activities 

Outcome/Output 

Indicators 

Physical 

Targets  

Accomplishments 

Actual 

Excess of 

Actual over 

Target 

Ease of 

Doing 

Business and 

Efficient 

Delivery of 

Government 

Services 

Program 

Number of agencies 

compliant to the new 

Citizens’ Charter 

 

300 8,210 7,910 

Number of agencies 

trained on Regulatory 

Impact Assessment  

 

   35      52 17 

Percentage of complaints 

referred/resolved within 

the turn-around time 

   50      34.1 (15.9) 

 

 

Financial Highlights 

 

10. The period of audit covers Current Year 2020. However, the financial position, 
financial performance and the sources and utilization of funds of ARTA were 

not yet submitted to this Office as of April 30, 2021.     

 

 

 

 



4 

 

III. SUMMARY ON NON-SUBMISSION OF REPORTS 

 

Non-submission of 2020 Reports and Documents 
 

11. The non-submission of financial reports, vouchers and other documents for 
CY 2020 within the prescribed period due to the lack of proper turn-over 

of financial reports and documents by the resigned Accounting Personnel 

precluded the Audit Team from conducting audit of transactions and 

communication of noted deficiencies, if any, contrary to Section 60, 

Chapter 19 of Government Accounting Manual (GAM), Volume 1, Sections 

41, 100, 122 of PD No. 1445 and such other pertinent issuances. 

 

11.1 Section 41 of PD No. 1445, otherwise known as the State Audit Code of 
the Philippines, requires, among others, that the chief accountant or the 

official in charge of keeping the accounts of a government agency to 

submit to the Commission on Audit year-end trial balances and such 

other supporting or subsidiary statements as may be required by the 

Commission not later than the fourteenth of February. 

 

11.2 Further, Chapter 19, Section 60 of the GAM, Volume I requires the 
submission of Financial Statements (FSs) and schedules by the 

Central/Head/Main Offices of NGAs within the prescribed deadline, as 

follows: 

 
Statement/Report Deadline Submit to 

Monthly Trial Balance (TB) and 

Supporting Schedules 

10 days after the 

end of the month 

Auditor, DBM, 

Management 

Quarterly FSs, Supporting Schedules 10 days after the 

end of the quarter 

Auditor, DBM, 

Management 

Yearend TB, FSs, Supporting 

Schedules  

February 14 of the 

following year 

Auditor, DBM, 

COA-GAS 

 

11.3 While COA Circular No. 95-006 requires disbursing officers shall 
faithfully comply with Section 100 of PD No. 1445 which require them 

to render monthly reports of their transactions pursuant to existing 

auditing regulations not later than the 5th day of the ensuing month to 

the auditor concerned, such as: 

 

a. Report of Advice to Debit Account Issued (Appendix 13, GAM Vol. 
II); 

b. Monthly Report of Disbursements (Appendix 23, GAM Vol. II); 
c. Report of Collection and Deposits (Appendix 26, GAM Vol. II); and 
d. Report of Checks Issued (Appendix 35, GAM Vol. II). 

 

11.4 Furthermore, under Section 1 of the COA and DBM Joint Circular No. 
2019-1 dated January 1, 2019 states that: 

 

“Agencies are required to regularly submit accountability 

reports to the DBM and COA in compliance with the pertinent 

Sections of the General Provisions of the annual General 

Appropriations Act.” 



5 

 

 

11.5 In relation thereto, Section 91 of the General Provisions of the General 
Appropriations Act Fiscal Year 2020 states that: 

 

“Financial and Physical Reports. Department, bureaus, offices 

and instrumentalities of the National Government shall submit 

quarterly reports on its financial and physical accomplishments 

as well as reports and other information mandated in the 

special and general provisions. . .” 

 

11.6 As of April 30, 2021, the ARTA was not able to submit the 2020 
Financial Statements Reports and the Financial Accountability Reports 

to the Audit Team including the vouchers and other financial documents 

and reports.  

 

11.7 During the entrance conference with the agency officials held on 
February 9, 2021, the Director of the Finance and Administration 

informed that the financial statements and reports as well as its 

supporting documents, but committed to submit the documents on 

March 15, 2021. 

 

11.8 On March 15, 2021 as committed, Management did not submit the 
agency’s 2020 year-end financial statements and its supporting 

documents citing as reasons the pandemic and lack of manpower being a 

newly created agency. Management further informed that the previous 

personnel in the Finance and Administration resigned without proper 

turnover of the financial documents, with the incumbent Accountant 

informing that numerous vouchers were with incomplete supporting 

documents. 

 

11.9 With the current predicaments such as stringent health and safety 
protocols due to the COVID-19 pandemic, scarcity of resources, and 

agency’s on-going organizational setup as a newly established entity, 

with Accounting Office of only two personnel to prepare the required 

financial documents and reports, the Finance and Administration Office 

submitted only the status of financial documents and reports as of March 

31, 2021, as shown in Table 1. 

 

 Table 1: Status of Reports and Documents 

 

Financial 

Reports 
Due date 

Period 

Covered 
Status 

Quarterly TB Within 10 days 

after end of the 

quarter 

1st to 4th 

Quarter 2020 

- First quarter 
prepared and 

completed 

- Second to fourth 
quarter on-going 

preparation 

Disbursement 

Vouchers (DVs) 

Not later than 

the 5th day of 

January-

December 

Prepared but 

incomplete 



6 

 

Financial 

Reports 
Due date 

Period 

Covered 
Status 

the ensuing 

month 

2020 supporting docs  

Journal Entry 

Vouchers (JEVs) 

Within 10 days 

after end of the 

month 

January-

December 

2020 

- First semester 
already prepared 

and completed 

- Second semester 
preparation on-

going  

Year-end Pre-

Closing TB/ 

Post-Closing TB 

February 14 January-

December 

2020 

Preparation on-going 

Financial 

Statements 

February 14 January-

December 

2020 

Preparation on-going 

Report of Advice 

to Debit Account 

Issued (RADAI) 

Not later than 

the 5th day of 

the ensuing 

month 

 

January-

December 

2020 

Preparation on-going 

Monthly Report 

of Disbursements 

Not later than 

the 5th day of 

the ensuing 

month 

January-

December 

2020 

Preparation on-going 

Report of Checks 

Issued (RCI) 

Not later than 

the 5th day of 

the ensuing 

month 

January-

December 

2020 

Preparation on-going 

Bank 

Reconciliation 

Statements 

Within 20 days 

from receipt of 

Bank 

Statements 

January-

December 

2020 

- January to March 
prepared 

- April to December 
on-going 

preparation  

 

11.10 Numerous follow-ups and reminders were made by the Audit Team for 
Management to submit the required FSs and its supporting documents on 

or April 30, 2021 and as of reporting date, but proved futile.   

 

11.11 The ARTA’s non-submission of financial reports and other documents 
prevented timely detection of any deficiency thereof and the 

corresponding corrective actions to be undertaken.  It likewise deprived 

the agency the opportunity of a timely audit that would serve as input in 

enhancing financial accountability, as stressed in Section 6, Chapter 19, 

Volume I of the GAM that “If there is an undue delay in the reporting of 

information, it may lose its relevance.” 

 

 

 

 

 



7 

 

11.16 We recommended and Management agreed to: 

 

a. prepare internal guidelines on the turn-over of documents for 
resigning or retiring personnel; 

 

b. communicate with the resigned personnel of the Finance Office to 
require them to turn over the financial documents and its 

attachments to the DVs and JEVs for the first semester of CY 

2020; and 

 

c. require the Chief Accountant to submit to the Audit Team all the 
financial reports and documents as required under existing rules 

and regulations. 

 

 

IV.    STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF PRIOR YEAR’S AUDIT 

RECOMMENDATION 

 

12.    No audit yet in 2019, thus no prior audit recommendation. 

 

 

V.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

 

13.    We wish to express our appreciation to the Management and staff of ARTA for 

the cooperation and assistance extended to the Audit Team during the audit. 

 

 

 

Very truly yours, 

 

COMMISSION ON AUDIT 

By 

 

 

 

CARIDAD A. SARMIENTO 

        Supervising Auditor 

 

 

 

 




