AUDIT OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

	

A)		AWARDS AND COMMENDATIONS

	

	Aklan State University (ASU) is the only university in the Province of Aklan and is considered one of Western Visayas' prestigious learning institutions. For calendar year 2020, ASU has lived up to its goal of being an Academic Pillar of Excellence (APEX) for Sustainable Development. The University’s plans and programs were recognized by different oversight government agencies, foreign counterparts and accreditation bodies and have been bestowed with different awards and commendations. Different courses offered by the University in the Higher Education Program and Advanced Education Program were evaluated and granted accreditation level status by the Accrediting Agency of Chartered Colleges and Universities in the Philippines (AACCUP), Inc., (see Annex IV). The University for having managed and implemented its human resource management (HRM) systems according to documented processes, thereby achieving a process-defined HRM in the four core HRM systems under the Enhanced Program to Institutionalize Meritocracy and Excellence in Human Resource Management (PRIME-HRM), was once again vested by the Civil Service Commission the PRIME-HRM Bronze Award on September 24, 2020, (see Annex V-A). Also, University students have showcased their talents and abilities despite the COVID-19 restrictions and collected different awards from different government agencies, (see Annex V-B to C for the complete list).

	

	Graduates of the University have also uplifted its banner by garnering high percentage of passers in different licensure examinations given by the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC) released on CY 2020. For the First Quarter of 2020, ASU-CIT’s Bachelor of Science in Architecture has garnered a 14.29% passing percentage on the licensure examination given on January 2020. And on the second quarter of CY 2020, graduates of Bachelor of Science in Elementary Education of ASU-Main Campus garnered an 82.35% passing percentage for first time takers on the September 2019 Licensure Examination for Teachers released on May 9, 2020. The ASU-CIT graduates of Bachelor of Civil Engineering has also a 71.05% passing percentage for the first-time takers of the Civil Engineering Licensure Examination given on November 2019 and released on May 7, 2020.  Results on different PRC licensure examinations and different awards given to ASU’s students for CY 2019 are listed in Annex III.

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	 

B)	FINANCIAL AND COMPLIANCE



Property, Plant and Equipment – ASU-Main Campus, ASU-CFMS, New Washington Campus and ASU-CIT, Kalibo Campus



1)		The balance of Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) in the Statement of Financial Position of Aklan State University - Main Campus, College of Fisheries and Marine Sciences (CFMS), and College of Industrial Technology (CIT) amounting to ₱539 million did not reconcile with the balance in the Report on the Physical Count of Property, Plant and Equipment (RPCPPE) submitted by the Campus’ Supply Officers as of December 31, 2020 reflecting a variance of ₱99 million, thus, rendered the PPE account in the financial statements unreliable. 



Section 42, Chapter 10, Volume I of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) states the following provisions in the accounting and property records to be maintained for Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE), to wit:



“Sec. 42. Accounting and Property Records to be maintained for PPE. The Chief Accountant shall maintain the Property, Plant and Equipment Ledger Card (PPELC) for each category of PPE including work and other animals, livestock etc. The PPELC shall be kept to record promptly the acquisition, description, custody, estimated useful life, depreciation, impairment loss, disposal and other information about the asset. For check and balance, the Property and Supply Office/Unit shall likewise maintain Property Card (PC) for PPE in their custody to account for the receipt and disposition of the same. The balance per PC shall be reconciled with PPELC maintained by the Accounting Division/Unit. They shall also be reconciled with other property records like Property Acknowledgement Receipt (PAR).”



Moreover, RPCPPE has been defined as the form used to report the physical count and condition of PPE by type as at a given date, including those which are unrecorded and those which could not be accounted for. It shows the balance of PPE per property cards being maintained by the Supply Office and per count and the shortage/overage, if any. It shall be rendered by the Inventory Committee, on its yearly physical count of properties owned by the entity.



Comparison of the recorded amount of PPE accounts on the Statement of Financial Position of All Funds as at December 31, 2020, of ASU-Main, CFMS and CIT Campuses with the submitted RPCPPE of the Campus’ Supply Officers revealed a discrepancy of ₱99 million (see Annexes VI-VIII for details) as follows:



















Table 1 – Comparison of Balances of PPE

CAMPUS

BALANCE

VARIANCE



PER FS

PER RPCPPE

Over/(Under) Stated

ASU-MAIN Campus

₱341,708,873.35

₱246,040,733.17

₱95,668,140.18

CFMS Campus

80,489,176.24

83,558,578.46

(3,069,402.22)

CIT Campus

117,131,265.58

110,872,207.91

6,259,057.67

TOTAL

₱539,329,315.17

₱440,471,519.54

₱98,857,795.63



Verification with ASU-Main Campus Accountant and Supply Officer disclosed that unreconciled PPE records of the Accounting and Supply Office Departments has been a perennial problem of the Campus as accounting records were destroyed when a fire broke on the Administration Building last March 2004. In addition, the records turned-over by their predecessors to the present Accountant and Supply Officer upon their assumption to duty in 2003 and 2004, respectively, included unreconciled PPE accounts. Moreover, the physical count of PPE for Calendar Year (CY) 2020 was not conducted due to community quarantine protocols imposed by the local government units.  Despite this, the Supply Officer has recently started dropping unserviceable properties from the Campus books.



On the other hand, the conduct of physical count of PPE, scheduled on April to May 2020, for ASU-CFMS and ASU-CIT was not done due to the Enhanced Community Quarantine imposed in the Province of Aklan. 



Nevertheless, all Campuses have updated their PPELC and PC except for transactions that were turned over to them by their predecessors upon their assumption of office more than 10 years ago. Likewise, the PPELC and PC duly supported the balances in the GL and Statement of Financial Position.



The unreconciled balance between the Statement of Financial Position and RPCPPE of ASU Main, CFMS and CIT Campuses, and the continuous non-reconciliation of the recorded PPE in the Accounting and the Supply Office records, rendered the validity of the account balances in the year-end financial statements unreliable.





We recommended and the Management agreed that the Accountants and Supply Officers:



a)	Gather all the documentary records available at hand for the reconciliation of the recorded PPE accounts in the Accounting Department and Supply Office; 



b)	Apply the guidelines and procedures in the Conduct of Physical Count of Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE), Recognition of PPE Items Found at Station, and Disposition for Non-existing/Missing PPE, for the One-Time Cleansing of PPE Account Balances of Government Agencies provided by Commission on Audit Circular No. 2020-006 dated January 31, 2020 to properly address the discrepancies in the Accounting Department and Supply Office records; and

						

c)		Prepare a workplan with timeline and persons responsible for the PPE reconciliation and submit to the office of the Auditor for monitoring purposes.





Semi-Expendable Properties – ASU-CFMS, New Washington Campus and 

ASU-CHARRM, Ibajay Campus



2)	The balances of Semi-Expendable Properties in the Financial Statements of Aklan State University-College of Fisheries and Marine Sciences (CFMS) and College of Hospitality and Rural Resource Management (CHARRM) amounting to ₱3.526 million and the Report on Physical Count of Inventories (RPCI) did not reconcile contrary to the requirement of Government Accounting Manual (GAM) Volume I, Chapters 8, resulting in an overstatement of the recorded Semi-Expendable Properties  rendering the account in the financial statements for calendar year (CY) 2020 unreliable. 



	The Government Accounting Manual (GAM) Volume I Chapter 8 discusses the definition, recognition, measurement and cost formulas to be used and related disclosure requirement in accordance with IPSAS 12 on Inventories.



Section 10 thereof defines semi-expendable property as tangible items below the capitalization threshold of P15,000.00. The following policies apply as follows:



a)	Semi-expendable properties which were recognized as PPE shall be reclassified to the affected accounts. 



b)	These tangible items shall be recognized as expenses upon issue to the end-user.



Among the records, forms and reports to be prepared and/or maintained by the agency for inventories as prescribed by Section 17, Chapter 8 of GAM are the following:



a)	Report on the Physical Count of Inventories (RPCI) (Appendix 66) – shall be used to report the physical count of supplies by type of inventory as at a given date.  It shows the balance of inventory items per card and per count and shortage/overage, if any. These include the semi-expendable property wherein the issue is covered by ICS.



The report shall be reconciled with the Supplies Ledger Cards and Stock Cards maintained by the Accounting Division/Unit, and Property and/or Supply Division/Unit, respectively. Any discrepancy shall be verified and/or adjusted accordingly.



b)	Inventory Custodian Slip (ICS) (Appendix 59) – shall be prepared upon issue of semi-expendable property covered by approved RIS.



Examination of the financial statements disclosed that the balances of semi-expendable properties amounting to ₱1.513 million for ASU-CFMS and ₱2.013 million for ASU-CHARRM as of December 31, 2020 are composed of the following:  



Table No. 2 ASU-CFMS Semi-Expendable Properties

Account

PER FS

PER RPCI

Semi-Expendable - Office Equipment

       145,960.82 

0.00

Semi-Expendable - ICT Equipment

       108,111.20 

0.00

Semi-Expendable-Marine and Fishery Equipment

         45,372.62 

0.00

Semi-Expendable Disaster and Rescue Equipment

         31,800.00 

0.00

Semi-Expendable-Medical and Dental Equipment

           1,578.45 

0.00

Semi-Expendable Other Machinery and Equipment

         22,668.04 

0.00

Semi-Expendable Furniture and Fixtures

       276,719.38 

0.00

Semi-Expendable-Books

       880,395.62 

0.00

TOTAL

   1,512,606.13 

0.00





Table No. 3 ASU-CHARRM Semi-Expendable Properties



PER FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

Per RPCI

Account

General Fund (GF)

Internally Generated Fund (IGF)

Business Related Fund (BRF)

Total

GF, IGF & BRF

Semi-Expendable- Office Equipment

22,200.00

664,369.70

0.00

686,569.70

0.00

Semi-Expendable –Information and Communications Technology Equipment

22,920.00

360,088.88

0.00

383,008.88

0.00

Semi-Expendable Disaster Response and Rescue Eqpt.

40,180.00

4,254.00

0.00

44,434.00

0.00

Semi-Expendable- Medical Equipment

0.00

15,900.00

0.00

15,900.00

0.00

Semi-Expendable Technical & Scientific Equipment

0.00

59,631.00

0.00

59,631.00

0.00

Semi-Expendable- Other Machinery & Equipment

0.00

146,805.00

24,620.00

171,425.00

0.00

Semi-Expendable- Furniture and Fixtures

0.00

641,612.00

9,991.00

651,603.00

0.00

TOTAL

85,300.00

1,892,660.58

34,611.00

2,012,571.58

0.00



However, the RPCI for all funds as of December 31, 2020 submitted by the Campus’ Supply Officers disclosed that there were no inventories left on hand as of year-end (Annexes IX and X). Moreover, the Supplies Ledger Cards (SLCs) of the Accounting Department were not updated. The last noted entries entered on the SLCs by the Accounting Departments of ASU-CFMS and ASU-CHARRM were on year 2016, and November 30, 2020, respectively.  As a result of these deficiencies, the balances of Semi Expendable Properties accounts in the financial statements are not reliable. 



Further, interview with the Supply Officers of ASU-CHARRM and ASU-CFMS disclosed that for ASU-CHARRM, the Supply Officer was not able to record semi-expendable properties in the RPCI because of her understanding that the report includes only office supply inventories. And as to ASU-CFMS, it is the first time for the Supply Officer to accomplish the said report, and according to him there was no actual inventory on hand as of December 31, 2020, thus, no balance was reported on the submitted RPCI.



Nevertheless, the Inventory Stock Cards maintained by the Campus’ Supply Officers were updated as of December 31, 2020.



The importance of reconciliation is to ensure that the semi-expendable properties in the accounting records actually exist and that all semi-expendable properties in the RPCI are recorded in the books of accounts. This is espoused in Section C.3, Chapter V of the Manual on Property Custodianship, as follows:



“After the physical inventory taking, the Inventory Committee shall reconcile the results of the count with the property and accounting records. The inventory listing of the supplies and materials shall be checked against the stockcards maintained by the Accounting and finally against the control accounts. On the other hand, the inventory listing of the equipment shall be checked with the property card maintained by the Property as against the equipment ledger cards maintained by the accounting and total, therefore, shall be compared with those in the general ledger.”



Non-reconciliation of the recorded inventory of semi-expendable properties and the RPCI hindered the effective asset monitoring and counterchecking of the account, therefore, accuracy and validity of the inventory account in the financial statements could not be established.



We recommended and the Management agreed that the Accountants and Supply Officers of ASU-CFMS and ASU-CHARRM:



a)	Reconcile the balances of the semi-expendable properties per books with the Report on Physical Count of Inventories (RPCI), Supplies Ledger Cards (SLC) and Stock Cards (SC) and consequently effect the necessary adjusting entries to update the Semi-Expendable Properties account and ensure accurate information of the financial statements; and



b)	Prepare a workplan with timeline and persons responsible for the inventory reconciliation and submit to the office of the Auditor for monitoring purposes.





Authorized Signatories in Contracts – ASU-CHARRM, Ibajay Campus



3)	A procurement contract for the printing of student Identification Cards (IDs) was entered into by the Campus University Student Council President with the supplier instead of the duly authorized Campus officials of Aklan State University-College of Hospitality and Rural Resource Management (CHARRM), thus, the requirements of Section 4 (5) of Presidential Decree No. 1445, 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 9184, and Republic Act No. 9055 were not adhered to resulting to improper disbursements. 



Presidential Decree No. 1445, otherwise known as the Government Auditing Code of the Philippines, declares that all resources of the government shall be managed, expended or utilized in accordance with law and regulations, and safeguarded against loss or wastage through illegal or improper disposition, with a view to ensuring efficiency, economy and effectiveness in the operations of the government. The responsibility to take care that such policy is faithfully adhered to rests directly with the chief or head of the government agency concerned. Section 4 (5) of the same regulation also provides that disbursements or disposition of government funds or property shall invariably bear the approval of the proper official. 



Republic Act (R.A.) No. 9184, otherwise known as the Government Procurement Reform Act, prescribed the necessary rules and regulations for the modernization, standardization, and regulation of the procurement activities of the Government of the Philippines (GoP). In Section 3 of the 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of R.A. No. 9184, one of the governing principles on government procurement is the system of accountability where both the public officials directly or indirectly involved in the procurement process as well in the implementation of procurement contracts and the private parties that deal with GoP are, when warranted by circumstances, investigated and held liable for their actions relative thereto. Likewise, Section 37.2.2 of the same regulation provides that the Procuring Entity shall enter into contract with the winning bidder within the same ten (10) day period provided that all the documentary requirements are complied with. Procuring Entity has been defined in the same IRR as any branch, constitutional commission, agency, department, bureau, office, or instrumentality of the GoP (NGA), including GOCC, GFI, SUC and LGU procuring goods, infrastructure projects and consulting services. 



Republic Act No. 9055 or the Aklan State University Charter, provides that the governing body of the University shall be the Board of Regents, which, among others, has the following specific powers:



(a) To authorize the construction or repair of its buildings, machineries, equipment and other facilities and the purchase and acquisition of real and personal properties, including necessary supplies, materials and equipment.



(b) To delegate any of its powers and duties provided for hereinabove to the president and/or other officials of the University as it may deem appropriate so as to expedite the administration of the affairs of the University.   



In the audit of the disbursement vouchers of ASU-CHARRM, it was noted that the contracting parties in the Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) for the procurement of services for the printing of student IDs (RFID type with case and lace) for the Campus’ First Year students, were the winning supplier and the University Student Council (USC) – Aklan State University Ibajay Campus, represented by its USC President. (See attached copy of the MOA as Annexes XI-A to G). The Campus Director issued a written authorization to the USC President to enter into a contract with the supplier dated November 6, 2018. 



A Campus Director of ASU has limited functions, responsibilities and authority based on the University President's Office Order. Among the duties and responsibilities of a Campus Director are as follows:



a. Administers the use and disbursement of allotted funds for ASU-Ibajay for the construction, repair/rehabilitation/maintenance of school buildings, library facilities, and vehicles as well as the procurement of equipment, supplies and materials, and services within the limit approved by the Board of Regents through the President;



b. Approves vouchers and signs checks for payment of supplies and materials of not more than fifty thousand pesos (₱50,000.00) for every financial transaction including approved contracts with government and private agencies/organizations.



Nothing in the Special Office Order of the Campus Director that authorized her to delegate his/her functions, responsibilities, and authority to any campus official.



Moreover, reading of Section 37.2.2 of the Revised IRR of R.A. No. 9184 showed that a University Student Council is not a procuring entity authorized to enter into a contract with the winning bidder in a procurement process.



On the other hand, the Certification as to the number of First-Year students enrolled in ASU-CHARRM, which was the basis for the number of IDs to be procured, was issued by the Office of the University Student Council and signed by its President, and not by the Campus Registrar’s Office, which has the responsibility and authority to issue such record.  



The above deficiencies rendered the disbursement improper. The MOA is also considered as a voidable contract because, as stated in the Civil Code of the Philippines, a contract is considered voidable when one of the parties is incapable of giving consent to a contract or where the consent is vitiated by mistake, violence, intimidation, undue influence or fraud. 



We recommended and the Management agreed that personnel duly authorized and having fiscal responsibility on the financial transactions of the ASU-CHARRM Campus be the one directly involved in the procurement process and sign in the necessary procurement documents to be legally binding to the Campus and other parties concerned.





Expenses – Honoraria – ASU-Main Campus 

						

4)	The grant of honoraria and reimbursement of expenses to the Regional Director of Commission on Higher Education (CHED) Region VI as resource person during Aklan State University Board of Regents meetings amounting to ₱3,600.00 and ₱12,490.00 (net of taxes) for CYs 2019 and 2020, respectively, were not supported by adequate documentation and was bereft of legal basis, thus, the amount disbursed is an irregular expenditure defined in Commission on Audit (COA) Circular No. 2012-003 dated October 29, 2012.



Sections 58 and 53 of the General Provisions of the General Appropriations Act for FYs 2019 and 2020, respectively, provides that honoraria may be paid only to the following:



1)	Teaching personnel of the DepEd, TESDA, SUCs and other educational institutions, engaged in actual classroom teaching, whose teaching load is outside of the regular office hours or in excess of the regular load;

2)	Those who act as lecturers, resource persons, coordinators and facilitators in seminars, training programs, and other similar activities in training institutions;

3)	Chairpersons and members of commissions, boards, councils, and other similar entities, including personnel thereof who are not paid salaries, nor per diems but compensated in the form of honoraria as provided by laws, rules and regulations;

4)	Those who are involved in science and technological activities and render services beyond their regular workload;

5)	Officials and employees assigned to special projects, xxx; and

6)	Officials and employees authorized to receive honoraria under R.A. No. 9184 and its IRR.



It was observed that for CYs 2019 and 2020, honoraria in the amounts of P3,600.00 and P12,490.00 (net of taxes), respectively, were paid by the Aklan State University (ASU) to the CHED Regional Director for her attendance to ASU’s governing board meetings (Annex XII). Perusal of documents revealed that the CHED Regional Director attended the meetings as a resource person. No documents were provided in the disbursement vouchers to support the authority of the CHED Regional Director to attend meetings of the ASU Board of Regents.



Apparently, this type of honoraria is not among those enumerated in the afore-cited regulations for entitlement to honorarium, thus, rendering the disbursement bereft of legal basis.  



Likewise, the following deficiencies were also observed:



1)	Claims for honoraria were not supported with complete supporting documents such as minutes of the meeting, attendance sheet, authority of the CHED Regional Director to attend BOR meetings, and payroll to establish the veracity of the claim; and



2)	Information on how the amounts of disbursement were arrived at were not included in the attachments/documents submitted.



						In reply to our Audit Observation Memorandum, the Management submitted Commission on Higher Education (CHED) Resolution No. 100-2018, excerpts from the Minutes of the 1st Quarter National Directorate and Commission en Banc meeting held on March 18-19, 2018 at CHED Auditorium, Quezon City, wherein, CHED has required the compulsory attendance of the Regional Directors to the meetings of State Universities and Colleges’ (SUCs) governing boards to ensure that the SUCs get the certificate of program compliance first before offering any new program.

						

The Management also cited that as per DBM Circular No. 2007-1 dated April 23, 2007, specifically in guideline 4.1, which specifies that government personnel who acts as lecturers, resource persons, coordinators or facilitators in other government agencies which are outside of their mother agencies may be paid honoraria at such rates as may be determined by the agency authorities concerned in accordance with the aforementioned Circular.

						

Honoraria for those who act as lecturers and resource persons is governed by Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Budget Circular 2007-1 dated April 23, 2007, which provides in part, the following:



	“Section 2.3 A resource person is any person who by virtue of his /her expertise on a specific subject area, serves as speaker in seminars, conferences, symposia, training programs and similar activities.



Section 4.5 Honoraria shall not be granted to the designated lecturers, resource persons and facilitators within their respective sponsoring agencies as such services are deemed part of the duties and responsibilities of their appointive positions to disseminate information, to clarify issues and concerns and to interact with clients and/or implementors of agency mandates.”



						One of the functions of the CHED Regional Office is to monitor and evaluate the performance of Higher Education Institutions in the region in terms of compliance to minimum standards for various higher education programs. Thus, attendance of the CHED Regional Director in the Board of Regent (BOR) meetings is in line with her duties and responsibilities pursuant to the mandate of her office, and therefore, covered by the limitations provided in Section 4.5 of the DBM Budget Circular No. 2007-1.

						

						In the absence of legal basis and insufficiency of documents, propriety and validity of payments of honoraria to the Regional Director of CHED Region VI could not be established.

						

						We recommended and the Management agreed that the practice of granting honoraria and other forms of allowances to the CHED Regional Director be discontinued.



						

		Expenses – Terminal Leave Benefits – ASU-Main Campus

		

5)	Payment of Terminal Leave Benefits to 13 retired/separated employees and officials of Aklan State University – Main Campus, totaling to P0.840 million, were made without the complete supporting documents prescribed by Section 4(6) of P.D. No. 1445 and Item 5.13 of COA Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012, thus, accuracy, propriety and completeness of the payment of terminal leave benefits could not be established.



Section 4(6) of Presidential Decree (PD) No. 1445 provides that claims against government funds shall be supported with complete documentation.



Corollary to this, the Commission on Audit (COA) issued Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012, prescribing the Revised Guidelines and Documentary Requirements for Common Government Transactions. Included in the said COA Circular is the list of documentary requirements for the payment of terminal leave benefit applied for by an official or an employee who intends to sever his connection with his employer.



For calendar year 2020, 13 employees of Aklan State University, Main Campus filed claims for terminal leave benefits. A total amount of ₱.840 million was charged to Terminal Leave Benefits (see Annex XIII).



Scrutiny of the Disbursement Vouchers and supporting documents for the payment of the above-mentioned Terminal Leave Benefits disclosed the following deficiencies, to wit: 



1)	Out of 13 claims, only two were supported with Clearance from Money, Property and Legal Accountability which were not even the Original copies;



2)	Duly approved Application for Leave were only attached to three claims;



3)	The following documentary requirements were lacking in all 13 claims:



a)	Certified photocopy of employees leave card as at last date of service duly audited by personnel Division and COA/Certificate of leave credits issued by the Admin/Human Resource Management Office (HRMO);

b)	Complete service record;

c)	Statement of Assets, Liabilities and Net Worth (SALN);

d)	Applicant’s authorization (in affidavit form) to deduct all financial obligations with the University;

e)	Affidavit of applicant that there is no pending criminal investigation or prosecution against him/her (RA No. 3019);



4)	Death Certificate, Marriage Contract, or Birth Certificate duly authenticated by Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) were not submitted as attachments to the claim of 1 deceased employee; and



5)	All Terminal Leave Benefits were approved and paid even without complete attachments and documentation. 



Verification with the Campus Accountant disclosed that due to the irregular working days and office hours as a result of the imposition of community quarantine restrictions in the Province of Aklan, the required documents for the payment of terminal leave benefits were not immediately included upon the approval of the disbursement vouchers. Nevertheless, this instance will not be repeated.



The absence of the necessary documents that would ascertain the validity and propriety of the payment of Terminal Leave Benefits indicates weakness in the internal control system of the University and such is contrary to the provisions of P.D. No. 1445 and COA Circular No. 2012-001.



We recommended and the Management agreed to:



a)	Direct the personnel in charge in processing the payment of Terminal Leave Benefits to submit the lacking documents cited, as required in COA Circular No. 2012-001, to avoid issuance of Notice of Suspension; and



b)	Instruct the Accountant and other personnel concerned to ensure that all claims for Terminal Leave Benefits are properly and completely supported with documents to establish the correctness of the claims pursuant to COA Circular 2012-001.

		

		

		

		

		

		

	Request for Relief from Accountability on Lost Properties – ASU-Main Campus

						

6)	Requests for relief from accountability for losses of government properties were not filed within the period of 30-days from the occurrence of the incident, and the necessary evidence submitted were incomplete as required by Section 73 of Presidential Decree No. 1445, thus, action by the Commission on Audit was belatedly completed and the accountable officers of Aklan State University-Main Campus were cleared from money and property accountabilities and allowed to retire or transfer office making recovery by the University on the lost properties doubtful.



Presidential Decree (PD) No. 1445 declares the following persons accountable and responsible for government funds and property, to wit:



	“Chapter 5 Accountability and Responsibility for Government Funds and Property



	Section 101. Accountable Officers; bond requirements



1)	Every officer of any government agency whose duties permit or require the procession or custody of government funds or property shall be accountable therefor and for safekeeping thereof in conformity with law.



x x x x x x.



Section 102. Primary and secondary responsibility.



1)	The head of any agency of the government is immediately and primarily responsible for all government funds and property pertaining to his agency.

2)	Persons entrusted with the possession or custody of the funds or property under the agency head shall be immediately responsible to him without prejudice to the liability of either party to the government.”



PD No. 1445 also provides the responsibility of the accountable officer in cases of loss due to casualty or force majeure, to wit:



“Section 73. Credit for loss occurring in transit or due to casualty or force majeure.



1)	When a loss of government funds or property occurs while they are in transit or the loss is caused by fire, theft, or other casualty or force majeure, the officer accountable therefor or having custody thereof shall immediately notify the Commission or the auditor concerned and, within thirty days or such longer period as the Commission or auditor may in the particular case allow, shall present his application for relief, with the available supporting evidence. Whenever warranted by the evidence credit for the loss shall be allowed. An officer who fails to comply with this requirement shall not be relieved of liability or allowed credit for any loss in the settlement of his accounts.”



	Commission on Audit (COA) Memorandum No. 1992-751 dated February 24, 1992 enumerated the documentation on petitions/requests for relief from accountability as follows:

	

		“1. The basic notice of loss to be filed immediately after the discovery of the loss and the request for relief from accountability which should be filed by the proper accountable officer within the reglementary period of 30 days from the occurrence of the loss, with the Auditor concerned or the Commission, as the case may be.

	

		1.1 In case of delay in the filing of the aforesaid notice and request, satisfactory explanation or the reason(s) for such delay should be submitted, after which the reasons/explanation given should be verified or confirmed by the Auditor concerned.

	

	1.2 If the occurrence of the loss has also been reported to other police agencies, like the N.B.I., C.I.S., etc., the progress/final investigation report thereon should be submitted.

	

		2. Copy of the Investigation, Inventory and Inspection report of the proper COA personnel on the facts and circumstances surrounding the loss;

	

		3. Affidavit or Sworn Statement of the proper accountable officer on the facts and circumstances surrounding the said loss, supported by the Affidavit of two (2) disinterested persons who have personal knowledge of such fact of loss;

	

		4. Comment and/or recommendation of the Agency Head concerned on the request;

	

		5. Comment and/or recommendation of the COA Director/OIC and/or Unit Head on the propriety of the request, together with a full statement of material facts;

	

		6. Exact or accurate amount of government cash or book value of the property, subject of the request for relief;

	

		7. Memorandum Receipts covering the properties subject of the request, if any; and

	

		8. A categorical determination by the Director/Auditor concerned on the absence of fault or negligence on the part of the accountable officer in the handling, safekeeping, etc. of the funds and properties under his custody as evidenced by a recital of the precautionary/security measures adopted to protect or safeguard them and the like.

	

			Additionally, in case of Fire:

	

	1. The progress and/or final report of the local Police/Fire Department or Station on the incident;

	

		2. List or inventory of burned or destroyed properties as well as those properties retrieved after the fire, stating therein the acquisition cost/book value of each item, duly verified by the Auditor concerned;

	

		3. Authenticated picture(s) showing the site/office or government properties razed by the fire; 

	

		4. Fire insurance policy, if any, covering subject property. If the property is insured, information as to whether or not the Agency concerned has already been paid the proceeds of the said insurance policy should be secured and, if so, evidence to this effect should be submitted. If insurance policy should be secured and, if so, evidence to this effect should be submitted. If the property has not been insured, reasons to this effect should be submitted.”

	

	For calendar year 2020, the Commission on Audit (COA) Regional Office No. VI released decisions on the Requests for Relief from Accountability of several Aklan State University-Main Campus employees. The Requests for Relief from Accountability were in relation to the loss of various school properties razed by fire on March 17, 2004 amounting to ₱9.998 million. Initially, the request for relief was filed on July 9, 2004 by the former ASU President at the time, almost four months after the occurrence of the incident, which is not in compliance with the 30-day period required in Sec. 73 of PD No. 1445. Advertently, due to incomplete submission of the required evidence and non-compliance with the requirement of individual filing of the accountable officers of the request for relief, the said requests were refiled on January 6, 2020. Consequently, the COA Regional Office VI granted the requests for relief of those accountable officers who were able to comply with the requirements on request for relief from accountability on October 9, 2020. 

	

	Unfortunately, some accountable officers were already deceased when the revised requests for relief from accountability were filed, thus, no action was taken on their accountabilities on the lost properties. It was also noted that some of the accountable officers were allowed to retire or transfer office and were given clearance from money and property accountabilities despite the pending resolution of their requests for relief from accountability. 

	

	Moreover, the audit observation holds true to other accountable officers not included in the subject request for relief who were in charge of properties of the University such as library books, office equipment, among others, wherein they were allowed to retire, resign or transfer office even though there were still properties in their custody which were lost, destroyed or returned and no corresponding requests for relief from accountability were applied for in the Commission on Audit. 

	

	This practice of the University has compromised the purpose of clearance from money and property accountability. It also makes the recovery of the value of the lost properties improbable if the request for relief from accountability be denied for those accountable officers who are no longer connected with ASU. (please see Annex XIV for the details). 

	

	We recommended and the Management agreed to:

	

a)		Require the filing of requests for relief from accountability of accountable officers within 30 days from the date of the incident as required in Section 73 of P.D. No. 1445;

	

b)		Require submission of complete documentary requirements pursuant to COA Memorandum No. 92-751 in order for the Commission to make timely audit action; and



c)		Issue clearance for money and property to the accountable officer only after the resolution of the request for relief from accountability.  

	

		

		Compliance with Republic Act No. 9184, the Government Procurement Reform Act



Composition of Bids and Awards Committee



7)	The Bids and Awards Committee of Aklan State University is composed of members who are at the same time one of the approving authorities of the University’s transactions in contravention with the expressed prohibition in Section 11.2.5 of the Revised IRR of Republic Act No. 9184, otherwise known as the Government Procurement Reform Act.



	Republic Act (RA) No. 9184 institutionalized the uniformed conduct of procurement of infrastructure projects, goods and consulting services, regardless of source of funds, whether local or foreign, by all branches and instrumentalities of government, its departments, offices and agencies, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations and local government units.

	

	To facilitate professionalization and harmonization of procedures and standards of RA No. 9184, each Procuring Entity shall establish in its head office a single Bids and Awards Committee (BAC) for its procurement. The BAC shall be chaired by at least a third ranking permanent official of the procuring entity other than its head. 

	

	It is expressly provided in Section 11.2.5 of Rule V of 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of RA No. 9184 that, “In no case, shall the Head of the Procuring Entity (HOPE) and/or the approving authority be the Chairperson or a member of the BAC.”

	

	In the standard Disbursement Voucher used in government payments, Box D indicates the Approved for Payment section wherein approval by the Head of the Agency or his/her Authorized Representative on the payment covered by the DV is exhibited. 

	

	Evaluation of the procurement documents submitted by the Aklan State University (ASU) to the Audit Team disclosed that the BAC Chairman is the Vice-President (VP) for Administration. In connection with this, the Audit Team required the submission of the Office Order creating the University's BAC. Under ASU Special Order No. 08-104, s. 2020 dated August 13, 2020, issued by the SUC President III, the composition of the University BAC was as follows:

	

	

	

	

	

	

			Chairperson		-	Vice President (VP) for Administration

			Vice Chairperson	-	Chief Administrative Office, Finance/

							Director, Finance

			Members		-	Administrative Officer V/Budget Officer III

						-	Campus Director, Banga Campus

						-	ASUFA, President/ Associate Professor IV

						-	End-User

	

	The designated University’s Vice-President for Administration has the following functions, responsibilities and authority vested in Special Order No. 07-07, s. 2020 dated July 6, 2020, among others, to wit:

	

1)		Serves as the deputy of the President and performs functions that the latter or the Board of Regents may assign;

	

2)		Ascertains that actual expenditures are in accordance with the authorized appropriations and allotments in the Offices following government accounting and auditing rules and regulations;



3)		Certifies in the disbursement vouchers that expenses/advances necessary and lawful and incurred under his/her direct supervision.

	

	The Designated Campus Director of ASU-Main Campus has the following functions, responsibilities and authority vested in Special Order No. 07-09, s. 2020, dated July 6, 2020, among others, to wit:

	

1)		Approves vouchers and sign checks for payment of supplies and materials of not more than fifty thousand pesos (₱50,000.00) for every financial transaction including approved contracts with government and private agencies/organizations;

	

2)		Approves vouchers and sign checks for mandatory payment of services rendered such as salaries, remittances, loans and bills with initial from the Finance Officer.

	

	The VP for Administration and ASU-Main Campus Director also serve as alternate signatories on check disbursements of the University in the absence of the SUC President together with the VP for Academic Affairs. There were several disbursement vouchers issued for CY 2020 where the signatory in Box D-Approved for Payment was the VP for Administration

	

	In July 2020, change of University administration was effected, wherein, the appointments of different University personnel to various departments and offices were made, including the Bids and Awards Committee. The appointment of the VP for Administration as Chairman of the BAC was in accordance with Section 11.2.2 (a) of the Revised IRR wherein the Chairperson of the BAC is at least a third (3rd) ranking permanent official of the procuring entity. The same is true with the appointment of the Main Campus Director as a member of the BAC. 

	

	The principles of a good internal control system dictate that procurement and payment functions are segregated to avert the possibility of conflict of interest that may arise under the circumstances. Thus, the Commission on Audit (COA), in its authority vested by the Constitution to promulgate accounting and auditing rules and regulations including those for the strengthening of internal control in the operations of the government, issued Circular No. 2003-004 dated July 30, 2003, that prohibits the Chief Accountant and the personnel of the Accounting Unit of any agency of the government from being regular members of the agency’s BAC as contemplated under the Revised IRR of RA No. 9184. However, they may serve as provisional members when the Unit is the end-user of the items subject of the bidding. 

	

	The designation of the VP for Administration and Campus Director ASU-Main Campus as BAC Chairperson and BAC Member, respectively, patently disregarded the prohibition of Section 11.2.5 of Rule V of the Revised IRR of RA No. 9184. It also negated the principle of a good internal control system wherein the procurement and payment functions are segregated to avert the possibility of conflict of interest.

	

We recommended and the Management agreed to the revocation of the designation of the Vice-President for Administration and Campus Director ASU-Main Campus as members of the Bids and Awards Committee of the University, and the appointment of qualified University personnel as members of the BAC in compliance with the qualifications and restrictions embodied in Section 11.2 of Rule V of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184.



						

						Non-Registration with mPhilGEPS – ASU-CMFS, New Washington Campus, ASU-CHARRM, Ibajay Campus and ASU-CIT, Kalibo Campus 



8)	Aklan State University (ASU)-College of Fisheries and Marine Sciences (ASU-CFMS), New Washington Campus, ASU-College of Hospitality and Rural Resource Management (ASU-CHARRM), Ibajay Campus, and ASU-College of Industrial Technology (ASU-CIT), Kalibo Campus, have not utilized the Modernized Philippine Government Electronic Procurement System (mPhilGEPS) in procuring Common-Use Supplies of the Campus contrary to the requirement in Section 8 of 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 9184.



	It has been the government's policy through Republic Act (RA) No. 9184 to promote transparency and efficiency and use of information and communications technology in the conduct of procurement.

	

	Section 8 of RA No. 9184 and Section 8.1.1 of its 2016 Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) mandates that there shall be a single portal that shall serve as the primary source of information on all government procurement. The Philippine Government Electronic Procurement System (PhilGEPS) shall serve as the primary and definitive source of information on government procurement. 

	

	Section 8.1.12 of the Revised IRR also mandates that all Procuring Entities shall utilize the PhilGEPS for the procurement of Common-Use Supplies in order to take advantage of the significant built-in efficiencies of the PhilGEPS and the volume discounts inherent in bulk purchasing. Moreover, Section 8.2.4.1 thereof authorizes the ordering of common-use and non-common use items online through a virtual store feature of the PhilGEPS. The 2016 Revised IRR has defined Common-Use Supplies and Equipment (CSE) as goods, materials, and equipment that are used in the day-to-day operations of Procuring Entities in the performance of their functions.

	

	Corollary to this, the Government Procurement Policy (GPPB) promulgated Resolution No. 20-2018 dated October 18, 2018 approving the Guidelines on the Use of the Virtual Store for the Procurement of Common-Use Supplies and Equipment (Guidelines for brevity). Section 4 of the said guidelines makes it mandatory for all agencies to fully use the modernized PhilGEPS (mPhilGEPS) to procure CSEs through its Virtual Store. Agencies referred in the Guidelines are departments, bureaus, offices and instrumentalities of all branches of government, including SUCs, GOCCs, GFIs and LGUs.

	

	Agencies are required to register with the Virtual Store by filling out the Virtual Store Buyer Registration Form to be provided by the Procurement Service (PS), which shall be signed by the Head of the Procuring Entity (HOPE) or his/her authorized representative. The agencies then upload their approved Annual Procurement Plan-Common-Use Supplies and Equipment (APP-CSE) in the mPhilGEPS, which shall be the basis of procurement from the Virtual Store. Once uploaded, the APP-CSE shall be the basis of the PS in forecasting CSE demands for the applicable budget year. The PS shall then create an eWallet for the agencies for the purpose of depositing funds, which shall be used to pay for the CSEs procured from the Virtual Store. 

	

	Agencies can only procure CSEs in accordance with the items and quantities indicated in their upload APP-CSE. CSEs that are not currently available from the assigned depot will be listed in the Certificate of Non-Availability of Stocks (CNAS) appearing in the Virtual Store of the assigned depot, and may then procured from sources other than the Virtual Store within the period stated in the CNAS.

	

	Audit of the financial transactions of ASU-CFMS, ASU-CHARRM and ASU-CIT for CY 2020 disclosed that the Campuses did not use the Virtual Store feature in the procurement of common-use supplies and equipment. Mostly, the Campus’ procurement of CSEs were made through the Negotiated Procurement-Small Value Procurement and Shopping, Alternative Modes of Procurement provided in RA No. 9184. However, Certificates of Non-Availability of Stocks (CNAS) from the Virtual Store were not included in the supporting documents for the payment of procured items. 

	

	Verification with the Management revealed that for all the Campuses concerned they all concede that they were not able to attached the copy of CNAS in the disbursement vouchers (DVs) as they were not aware that it is one of the needed supporting documents in the DVs for procurement of CSEs. Moreover, ASU-CFMS has informed the Audit Team that it has already processed its registration with the mPhilGEPS Virtual Store, and ASU-CIT has already been officially registered in the mPhilGEPS and making use of the site in posting for the common-use supplies and equipment if the total amount is over ₱50,000.00.

	

	Non-utilization of the Virtual Store by the Campuses has deprived the government of the advantage of the significant built-in efficiencies of the PhilGEPS and the volume discounts inherent in bulk purchasing.

	

	We recommended and the Management agreed to:

	

a)		Ensure compliance with Section 8.1.2 of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 on utilizing the mPhilGEPS for the procurement of common-use supplies and equipment;

	

b)		Register with the Virtual Store and avail of its facilities in procuring CSEs in accordance with the guidelines set by GPPB Resolution No. 20-2018, dated October 18, 2018, and furnish the Audit Team copy of the Certificate of Registration for ASU-CHARRM; and

	

c)	Include in the submission of procurement documents and attached as supporting document in the disbursement voucher the Certificate of Non-Availability of Stocks (CNAS) in case the procured CSEs are not available in the Virtual Store, subject to the guidelines set in GPPB Resolution No. 20-2018, dated October 18, 2018.



COVID-19 Audit



9)	The year 2020 has been a challenging year for the whole Philippines due to the widespread of Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). The health, safety, security and livelihood of the Filipinos were put under threat, thus, a state of national emergency was declared under Republic Act (RA) No. 11469 or the Bayanihan to Heal as One Act (Bayanihan Act One) which was approved on March 24, 2020; and in view for the need to sustain COVID-19 response and recovery intervention by the government, RA No. 11494 or the Bayanihan to Recover as One Act (Bayanihan Act Two) was approved on September 11, 2020.



Many sectors of society have been affected by the strict implementation of restrictions in community quarantine guidelines. The education sector, where States Universities and Colleges (SUCs) belong, was not spared and even suffered a massive shift from face-to-face education system to online mode of learning. Several adjustments had to be made by the Aklan State University (ASU) in order to adapt with the changes in the education system but still provide the quality of education expected from the University. On top of this mandate to deliver quality education in time of pandemic, social responsibility and community care have also been considered by the University. For CY 2020, ASU has answered the call of the Bayanihan to Heal as One Act with the following activities, to wit:





Table No. 5 COVID-19 Responses of ASU

Program/Activity

Beneficiaries

Source of Funds

Amount

Production and distribution of Ethyl Alcohol

Different Government Offices

ASU Fund/ Provincial Government of Aklan

₱55,650.00

Production and distribution of PPEs (face shields, face 



masks, hair caps, coverall suit)

Different Government Offices

Donations/ Crowd Sourcing – Office Supplies

51,818.00

Preparation, procurement, distribution of food packages

Stranded students ASU-Banga and ASU-New Washington

Donations of Faculty

99,671.00

Distribution of food packages 

Different Government Offices/ Selected Senior citizens and households/ ASU Personnel

Donations of Faculty

151,749.90

Financial Assistance/Aid

ASU personnel/ Selected Frontliners/ High School Students

Donations of University Officials, faculty and personnel

92,200.00

Preparation and distribution of IEC Materials on COVID Prevention

Local Government Units

Donations

5,546.00

Provision of technical assistance in preparation of disinfectant

LGU-Ibajay

N/A

N/A

Provision for start-up materials for ethyl alcohol fermentation

LGU-Kalibo

Donation 

10,000.00

Preparation and distribution of hand washing soap/liquid and disinfectant

Different ASU Offices and Other government agencies

Donations

6,710.00

  

							The Commission on Higher Education (CHED) has recognized the contribution of ASU’s School of Arts and Sciences on producing 70% ethyl alcohol from 40% gin through the process of distillation as one of the best COVID-19 initiatives of state universities and colleges in the country. The University then donated these gallons of ethyl alcohol to different hospitals, medical facilities and local government units in the province of Aklan.

							

							The University has also enacted various health protocols in order to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 such as setting up of handwashing area and temperature check upon entry, the conduct of online meetings and classes, implementation of alternative work arrangement among faculty and personnel, installation of plastic barriers on office tables, strict implementation of the use of face mask all the time, among others.

							

							Personnel of the University who physically reported to the office during the implementation of Enhanced Community Quarantine in the Province of Aklan for the period March 23, 2020 to April 30, 2020 were compensated with Hazard Pay in accordance to the guidelines set by the Department of Budget and Management Budget Circular No. 2020-1 dated March 24, 2020.

							

							Despite the difficulties and hindrances encountered due to community quarantine restrictions imposed by the National Government, the University has extended its helping hands to its students, faculty, personnel and different sectors of society, easing the impact of COVID-19 on their lives.

							

							

							Gender and Development 





10)	Annual GAD Accomplishment Report on the conduct of GAD Activities of the University for calendar year 2020 was not submitted to the Audit Team within the reglementary period required under Section V of Commission on Audit Circular No. 2014-001 dated March 18, 2014.



COA Circular No. 2014-001 dated March 18, 2014 provides the revised guidelines in the audit of Gender and Development (GAD) Funds and Activities in government agencies. 



Section V of the said Circular provides the responsibility of the Audited Agency concerning the submission of reports to the Audit Team as follows:



	“The Audited agency shall submit a copy of the Annual GAD Plan and Budget (GPB) to the COA Audit Team assigned to the agency within five (5) working days from the receipt of the approved plan from the PCW or their mother or central offices, as the case maybe. Likewise, a copy of the corresponding Accomplishment Report shall be furnished the said Audit Team within five (5) working days from the end of January of the preceding year.”



The GAD Accomplishment Report (AR) for calendar year 2020 was not submitted within the prescribed period of five working days from the end of January of the preceding year, which is February 5, 2020, as required in COA Circular No. 2014-001. The GAD AR was submitted only on February 21, 2021 upon follow-up by the Audit Team to the GAD Focal Person. 



The Management asserted that the lapses committed were merely due to some inadvertent and uncontrolled circumstances and oversight since an old format was used in accomplishing the GAD accomplishment report. Nevertheless, the Management vowed to send the GAD Focal Person to training and benchmark from other SUCs that has good GAD Practices.



The non-submission of the GAD AR to the Audit Team hampered the timely auditorial review on the propriety and compliance of the GAD Activities to PCW-NEDA-DBM Joint Circular No. 2012-01. The preceding is a reiterated audit finding from CY 2018 Annual Audit Report.



We recommended and the Management agreed that the University GAD Focal Person submit to the Audit Team the GAD Accomplishment Report within five working days from the end of January of the preceding year.





11)	Harmonized Gender and Development Guidelines (HGDG) Tools were not utilized in attributing significant programs of the University to the GAD Budget contrary to the provisions of PCW-NEDA-DBM Joint Circular No. 2012-01, thus, the actual costs/expenditures reflected in the submitted GAD Accomplishment Report are unreliable and unverifiable as to its gender responsiveness.



PCW-NEDA-DBM Joint Circular No. 2012-01 provides for the Guidelines for the Preparation of Annual Gender and Development (GAD) Plans and Budgets and Accomplishment Reports to Implement the Magna Carta of Women.



Section 6.4 of the said Joint Circular provides the guidelines for attributing agency’s major programs to the GAD Budget. Under the said Section, attribution to the GAD Budget of a portion of the University’s major programs is a means to gradually increase the gender responsiveness of the University’s programs and budgets, wherein the use of Harmonized Gender and Development (HGDG) tools is prescribed.



The Joint Circular provides the following score card that the agency will utilize in determining the extent of the existing and major activities that can be attributed to GAD Budget, to wit:

Table No. 6 HGDG Score Card

HGDG Score

Description

Corresponding budget for the year of the program that may be attributed to the GAD budget

Below 4.0

GAD is invisible

0% or no amount of the program budget for the year may be attributed to the GAD Budget

4.0 – 7.9

Promising GAD prospects (conditional pass)

25% of the budget for the year of the program may be attributed to the GAD budget

8.0 – 14.9

Gender Sensitive

50% of the budget for the year of the program may be attributed to the GAD budget

15.0 – 19.9

Gender-responsive

75% of the budget for the year of the program may be attributed to the GAD Budget

20.0

Fully gender-responsive

100% of the total budget for the year of the program may be attributed to the GAD budget



During the preparation of the GAD Accomplishment Report (AR), the agency will again administer the HGDG test to determine the extent that the targeted HGDG score is attained. This score will be the basis in determining actual expenditure that can be attributed to the GAD Budget.



In the audit of CY 2020 GAD AR of Aklan State University, it was noted that the HGDG Tools were not utilized in determining the percentage of expenses of the University’s programs that can be attributed to GAD Budget. Estimates were used in calculating the actual costs/expenditures of GAD in the Accomplishment Report. Thus, the reported actual costs/expenditures reported in the submitted GAD AR did not reflect the proper expenses that are allowed to be attributed to the GAD Budget based on the criteria in HGDG Tools if they are gender sensitive or responsive.





We recommended and the Management agreed that the University’s GAD Focal Person utilize the HGDG tools in determining the programs and activities that will be included in the GAD Budget for the year and in attributing the actual costs/expenditures that will be charged in the GAD Budget and reported in the Accomplishment Report to provide accurate and reliable data on the utilization of GAD Budget based on the mandate it was formulated. It is also recommended that further trainings on the use of HGDG tools be availed by the GAD Focal Person and other office concerned to effectively perform their duties.



	Compliance with Bureau of Internal Revenue Rules and Regulations

	

Generally, ASU has complied with the requirements of the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) Tax Revenue Regulation No. 10-2008, dated July 8, 2008 on the withholding of taxes on payments due or payable to suppliers of goods and/or services and Revenue Memorandum Circular No. 23-2007, dated March 23, 2007 on the withholding of taxes on compensation income.



For CY 2020, a total of ₱35.952 million were withheld from compensation and payments to suppliers/contractors; of which ₱36.181 million were remitted to the BIR, including the beginning balance of ₱0.564 million, leaving an unremitted balance of ₱0.335 million as of December 31, 2020.  The balances were remitted on January 2021 before its deadline.



Table 7 – Schedule of Due to BIR

Particulars

Campuses

Total



MAIN

CFMS

CHARRM

CIT



Beginning Balance, 1/1/2020

₱454,046.42

₱0.00

₱58,606.53

₱51,054.93

₱563,707.88

Add:











1.  General Fund

22,829,724.08

3,131,065.34

1,806,542.57

5,953,255.48

33,720,587.47

2.  Internally Generated Fund

967,204.32

113,642.98

143,852.59

392,656.39

1,617,356.28

3.  Business Related Fund

217,761.01

30,485.52

3,643.48

8,720.87

260,610.88

4. Trust Fund

225,211.59

43,426.15

4,245.81

0.00

272,883.55

5. Other Funds

0.00

80,628.83

0.00

0.00

80,628.83

Sub-Total

24,239,901.00

3,399,248.82

1,958,284.45

6,354,632.74

35,952,067.01

Total Due to BIR

24,693,947.42

3,399,248.82

2,016,890.98

6,405,687.67

36,515,774.89

Less:  Taxes Remitted











1.  General Fund

22,632,358.98

3,131,065.34

1,790,690.83

5,953,255.48

33,507,370.63

2.  Internally Generated Fund

1,187,508.46

113,642.98

173,094.83

437,197.88

1,911,444.15

3.  Business Related Fund

258,809.23

30,485.52

3,643.48

15,234.31

308,172.54

4.  Trust Fund

325,325.72

43,426.15

4,245.81

0.00

372,997.68

5. Other Funds

0.00

80,628.83

0.00

0.00

80,628.83

Sub-Total

24,404,002.39

3,399,248.82

1,971,674.95

6,405,687.67

36,180,613.83

Ending Balance, 12/31/2020

₱289,945.03

₱0.00

₱45,216.03

₱0.00

₱335,161.06



However, the following deficiency was noted:



12)	Taxes on government payments amounting to ₱2.052 million, withheld by the Aklan State University (ASU) – Main Campus, College of Fisheries and Marine Sciences (CFMS), College of Hospitality and Rural Resource Management (CHARRM), and College of Industrial Technology (CIT) were not remitted to the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) through bank debit system as required in the Electronic Commerce Act of 2000 and BIR Revenue Regulations No. 1-2013 dated January 23, 2013.





	Republic Act No. 8792, otherwise known as the Electronic Commerce Act of 2000, was enacted to facilitate domestic and international dealings, transactions, arrangements, agreements, contracts and exchanges and storage information through the utilization of electronic, optical and similar medium, mode, instrumentality and technology to recognize the authenticity and reliability of electronic documents related to such activities and to promote universal use of electronic documents related to such activities and to promote the universal use of electronic transaction in the government and general public.

	

	Sec. 27 thereof requires that all departments, bureaus, offices and agencies of the government, as well as government-owned and controlled corporations, that pursuant to law require or accept the filing of documents, require that documents be created, or retained and/or submitted, issue permits, licenses or certificates of registration or approval, or provide for the method and manner of payment or settlement of fees and other obligations to the government, shall, among others,  require and/or accept payments, and issue receipts acknowledging such payments, through systems using electronic data messages or electronic documents.

	

	Corollary to this, the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) issued Revenue Regulations (RR) No. 1-2013 dated January 23, 2013 with the subject matter: Further expands the coverage of taxpayers required to file tax returns and pay taxes through electronic filing and payment system (eFPS) to include National Government Agencies (NGAs) Mandatorily Required to use the electronic Tax Remittance Advice (eTRA). Though BIR RR No. 1-2013 regulates the eFPS  for eTRA, Section 5 of the said RR requires that National Government Agencies (NGAs) shall also enroll with any authorized agent bank (AAB) where it intends to pay through the bank debit system, in cases of remittance of withheld taxes on funds not coming from the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) or the payment of internal revenue thru cash and not thru Tax Remittance Advice (TRA). Section 7 of the same RR further elaborates this mandate, as follows:

	

		“Section 7. TIME OF FILING OF RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX DUE. x x x x x x x x x x x x x

	

		The use of eTRA as payment is limited only to the NGAs’ tax liabilities arising from the use of funds coming from the DBM. NGAs’ tax liabilities arising from the use of funds other than those coming from DBM based on the NGAs Annual Budget as approved under the General Appropriations Act (GAA) must be paid using cash through the bank debit system of the AAB where the NGA shall enroll for this purpose. A separate tax return must be accomplished for these tax liabilities since a particular fund is required to have a separate branch code.”

	

	The four campuses of Aklan State University have adopted the electronic filing of tax returns on its withholding taxes for government payments on all funds religiously and within the reglementary period required by law. However, payments of taxes due in the Special Trust Fund, Trust Fund and Business Related Fund of the University were made through check payments and received manually by the BIR Revenue District Officer rather than through bank debit system as required in BIR RR No. 1-2013 (see Annexes XV-XVIII for details). 

	

	Verification with Accountants of the four campuses of ASU disclosed that ASU-Main and CIT Campuses have already enrolled one of their accounts with Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP) to be used in the eFPS payment but for ASU-Main when they tried to use the said bank accounts, the payments were not processed successfully. As to ASU-CIT prior remittances until May 2020 were made through bank debit system but in the succeeding months up to the present, the BIR payments were made through checks due to system problems between DBP and BIR. Several verbal follow-ups with the DBP regarding the bank debit system were made by ASU-CIT but to no avail. As to ASU-CFMS, through its Accountant I, the Management has tried to enroll with eFPS but encountered many problems like only one email address and one enrollment was only allowed and poor internet connection of the Campus. And for ASU-CHARRM, the Management has not enrolled with the eFPS payment and will comply with BIR RR No. 1-2013.

	

	Non-compliance with the requirement of BIR RR No. 1-2013 defeats the purpose of the Electronic Commerce Act of 2000 in promoting the universal use of electronic transactions in the government and general public. Moreover, non-payment of taxes through AAB does not facilitate transparency and efficiency in revenue collection reporting and reconciliation as all parties can view and record the University's remittances in real-time.

	

We recommended and the Management agreed to strictly comply with BIR RR No. 1-2013 on enrollment with any AAB and for the payment of taxes due in the Special Trust Fund, Trust Fund, Business Related Fund, and other funds not coming from the DBM through bank debit system by trying to address the issues/problems encountered in its attempts to avail thereof.





	Compliance with the Government Service Insurance System (GSIS) Regulations on Remittances of Compulsory Contributions

	

	

13)	In compliance with Section 6 (b) of RA No. 8291, or the GSIS Act of 1997 on the remittance of compulsory contributions to the GSIS, the ASU remitted in 2020 a total of ₱44.220 million out of the total contributions including the beginning balance of ₱11,846.68, leaving a balance of ₱140,606.24 as shown below.



Table 8– Schedule of Due to GSIS

Particulars

Campuses

Total



MAIN

CFMS

CHARRM

CIT



Beginning Balance, 1/1/2020

       ₱6,653.23 

  ₱0.00

₱5,153.02

₱40.43

₱11,846.68

Add:  Contribution











1.  Premiums

14,560,438.27

3,163,548.06

2,577,693.35

7,578,550.78

27,880,230.46

2.  Loans

10,233,535.37

2,651,332.99

1,232,809.85

2,350,838.92

16,468,517.13

Sub-Total

24,793,973.64

5,814,881.05

3,810,503.20

9,929,389.70

44,348,747.59

Total Due to GSIS

24,800,626.87

5,814,881.05

3,815,656.22

9,929,430.13

44,360,594.27

Less: Remittances

24,719,875.92

5,814,881.05

3,766,398.86

9,918,832.20

44,219,988.03

Ending Balance, 12/31/2020

₱80,750.95

₱0.00

₱49,257.36

₱10,597.93

₱140,606.24





Compliance with Republic Act No. 9679 on Proper Deduction of Pag-ibig Fund Contribution and Short-Term Loan Amortization and Remittance to the Home Development Fund (HDMF)



14)	In compliance with Republic Act No. 9679, An Act Further Strengthening the Home Development Mutual Fund, and for Other Purposes dated July 21, 2009, Aklan State University has complied with the proper deductions of Pag-IBIG Fund Contributions both on Employees’ and Government Shares and repayment of loans, and the same were remitted within the prescribed period. For CY 2020, the total Employees’ Contributions deducted from employees’ salaries were ₱2.631 million with the Government Share of ₱0.468 million. In addition, the loan payments deducted for CY 2020 totaled to ₱3.635 million. The total remitted HDMF contributions and loan payments for CY 2020 totaled to ₱6.715 million leaving a balance of ₱18,512.87.





Table 9 – Schedule of Due to HDMF

PARTICULARS

MAIN

CFMS

CHARRM

CIT

TOTAL

Beginning Balance, 01/01/2020

₱0.00

₱0.00

₱0.00

₱3.17

₱3.17

Add: Contributions











a. Cont. during the Year













Employees’ Share

1,173,330.56

392,400.00

280,700.00

784,255.32

2,630,685.88



Government Share

212,600.00

91,000.00

64,400.00

100,400.00

468,400.00



Total Contributions

1,385,930.56

483,400.00

345,100.00

884,655.32

3,099,085.88

b. Repayments of Loans

2,250,151.79

358,747.55

430,748.52

594,879.03

3,634,526.89

Total Due to HDMF

3,636,082.35

842,147.55

775,848.52

1,479,537.52

6,733,615.94

Less: Remittances











	a)	HDMF Contributions

1,385,730.56

483,400.00

345,100.00

884,655.32

3,098,885.88

b. Loans

2,250,151.79

358,747.55

412,438.82

594,879.03

3,616,217.19



Sub-total

3,635,882.35

842,147.55

757,538.82

1,479,534.35

6,715,103.07

Ending Balance 12/31/2020

₱200.00

₱0.00

₱18,309.70

₱3.17

₱18,512.87





Status of Settlement of Audit Suspensions, Disallowances and Charges



15)		The beginning balances of audit suspensions and disallowances as of January 1, 2020 amounted to ₱0.433 million and ₱1.258 million, respectively.  During the year, a total of ₱0.254 million of transactions were suspended in audit while a total of ₱0.350 million were settled with a remaining balance of ₱0.337 million.  In addition, transactions disallowed during the year totaled to ₱21,573.06 and a total settlement of ₱70,847.17 were made, leaving a balance of ₱1.208 million.  See Table 10 for details.  There was no Notice of Charge issued during the year. 

	

	For the year 2020, Notices of Finality of Decisions amounting to ₱11,999.00 were issued to ASU-Main Campus:

	

 Table 10 – Schedule of Audit Suspensions & Disallowances

Campuses

Notice of Suspension

Notice of Disallowance



Beg. Balance

This Period                        January - December 2020

Ending Balance        12-31-2020

Beg. Balance

This Period                        January – December 2020

Ending Balance        12-31-2020





NS

NSSDC





ND

NSSDC



1

ASU – Main

356,717.68

0.00

115,038.68

241,679.00

1,247,773.47

16,852.56

56,326.67

1,208,299.36

2

ASU - CFMS

76,052.78

175,292.34

198,279.12

53,066.00

7,280.00

1,515.00

8,795.00

0.00

3

ASU - CHARRM

0.00

78,240.19

36,419.67

41,820.52

2,520.00

0.00

2,520.00

0.00

4

ASU – CIT

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

3,205.50

3,205.50

0.00



TOTAL

432,770.46

253,532.53

349,737.47

336,565.52

1,257,573.47

21,573.06

70,847.17

1,208,299.36

		

	

58









