		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		PART II   -    DETAILED AUDIT OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

		

DETAILED AUDIT OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS





A)	 Financial and Compliance Audit



1)	The valuation and correctness of the Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) account costing P853,937,007.10 and with book value amounting to P767,370,690.44, could not be ascertained due to unreconciled PPE account balances in the books with the Report on the Physical Count of Property, Plant and Equipment (RPCPPE), contrary to Sections 38 and 42 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume I.



	1)	Section 38, GAM for NGAs, Vol. I, states that:



	“The entity shall have a periodic physical count of PPE, which shall be done annually and presented on the Report on the Physical Count of Property, Plant and Equipment (RPCPPE) as at December 31 of each year.  This shall be submitted to the Auditor concerned not later than January 31 of the following year.  Equipment found at station and losses discovered during the physical count shall be reported to the Accounting Division/Unit for proper accounting/recording.” 



	2)	In addition, Section 42 of the same Manual states that:

	

	“The Chief Accountant shall maintain the PPELC for each category of PPE including work and other animals, livestock, etc.  The PPELC shall be kept to record promptly the acquisition, description, custody to account for the receipt and disposition of the same.  The balance per PC shall be reconciled with PPELC maintained by the Accounting Division/Unit.  They shall also be reconciled with other property records like PAR.”

	

	3)	As at December 31, 2020, the University’s PPE accounts had a total cost of P853,937,007.10 as shown in the Statement of Financial Position, and recorded in the books of three (3) Campuses as follows:



Diffun

    P 768,239,073.24 

90.0%

Cabarroguis

            11,954,219.23 

1.4%

Maddela

            73,743,714.63 

8.6%

TOTAL

    P 853,937,007.10 

100.0%

  

	4)	Comparing the Financial Statement and the RPCPPE submitted by the Supply Officers of the three Campuses, there was a total net difference of P363,061,502.14 or 42.52% of the total reflected PPE cost balance (Annex E).  The book value of the PPE amounting to P767,370,690.44 comprises 80.86% of the total assets, including the construction in progress accounts.



	5)	The difference can be attributed to the following:

	

a)			The Land account has a difference of P55,650,000.00.  This amount was recognized in the books by the Accountant of Maddela Campus, however, he was not able to present the document as basis for the amount recorded.  For this reason, the personnel in the Supply/Property Office did not concur with the amount recorded.

		

b)			The following items were present in the Financial Statements, while these were not found on the Inventory Report:

	

Account Title

Amount

Other Land Improvements

P    14,532,416.40 

Road Networks

       3,555,378.33 

 Machinery

     6,933,797.73 

Communication Equipment

            96,601.82 

Military, Police and Security Equipment 

          681,824.60 

Watercrafts

            22,260.00 

Other Transportation Equipment

            75,714.28 

Books 

       3,139,757.52 

Other Property, Plant and Equipment

          347,872.04 

Construction in Progress-Land Improvements

         328,118.59 

Construction in Progress-Infrastructure Assets

     12,371,226.13 

Construction in Progress-Buildings and Other Structures

   261,445,528.34 

TOTAL

P  303,530,495.78

	

c)		Some PPEs were derecognized in the RPCPPE but the corresponding entries or disclosures in the Financial Statements were not taken up.  Relative to this, comparison between the 2020 and 2019 RPCPPE showed that some PPE items amounting to P878,018.00 (Annex F) were no longer inventoried, summarized as follows:

	

Diffun

P   357,248.00

Cabarroguis

     206,972.00

Maddela

     313,798.00

TOTAL

P   878,018.00

	

	There were no requests for relief from property accountability received by the Audit Team with regard to these PPEs.

	

d)		PPEs of Cabarroguis and Maddela Campus recorded in the books of Fund 01 of Diffun Campus were not transferred and reflected in the Financial Statements of the concerned Campus where the PPE items are found or located.   This, affected the presentation of the Financial Statements which showed distorted distribution of PPEs throughout the Campus.

	

e)		Tangible assets, which did not pass the capitalization threshold of P15,000.00, were already excluded in the RCPPE and included in the Inventory of Semi-Expendable Report, while the Accounting has not yet identified and reclassified previously recorded PPE amounting below P15,000.00, particularly those purchased in 2017 and below.

	

f)		Non-preparation of the required PPE Ledger Cards (PPELC) by the Accounting Unit and the Property Cards (PC) by the Supply Unit in the previous years, and the failure to constantly reconcile the two records on a regular basis like monthly, quarterly, or semi-annually.



	6)	The PPELC is used for each class of PPE to record the acquisition, description, custody, estimated life, depreciation, impairment, disposal, transfer/adjustment, repair history and other information about the property.  This supports the balances of PPE as shown in the Financial Statements.  The Accounting Unit keep and maintain ledger cards for its properties purchased during the current year, while those purchased in the previous years were not. 

 

	7)		On the other hand, the PC is used by the Supply and/or Property Division/Unit to record the description, acquisition, transfer, disposal, and other information about the PPE while the Property Acknowledge Receipt (PAR) is used by the Supply and/or Property Division/Unit for the issuance and the acknowledgement of receipt of the PPE by the end-user. Although, PCs were prepared and kept by the Supply/Property Unit, these are incomplete and are still currently being updated as of year-end.  Several issuances of property to employees in the previous years were not also accompanied with properly accomplished PAR.

	

	8)		The difference between the two records could have been easily detected had the PPELCs and PCs were prepared accordingly.  The constant and regular reconciliation of these two records of the Accounting Unit and Supply/Property Unit would have deterred the accumulation of the unreconciled balances of the PPEs.

	

	9)		The non-preparation of the PPELC in the previous years, incomplete data of the PC and absence of other available references caused difficulty in reconciling the Accounting Office and Supply Office records to come up with the accurate balance of PPE. Hence, the material unreconciled difference of P363,061,502.14 rendered the existence and correctness of the balances of PPE doubtful.

	

	10)		This is a reiteration of prior year’s audit finding and communicated to the Management through Audit Observation Memoranda and previous Annual Audit Reports.  But as at December 31, 2020, this remained uncorrected and pending for action.

	

	11)		We recommended that:



a)	the Accountant of Maddela Campus provide the reference documents for the recorded amount of Land.  Otherwise, revert the entry and request for proper appraisal of the land properties of the Maddela Campus through the concerned government agencies to provide basis for the valuation thereof;



b)	the Accountants and Supply Officers must investigate the discrepancies noted, particularly those appearing with balances in the Financial Reports while none was reported in the Inventory count.  Make the necessary adjustments in each particular record if necessary;



c)	the Supply Officers determine the whereabouts of those unreported items in 2020 and, if no longer found, report the loss to the Management and the Accounting Unit for appropriate action.  The Accounting Unit must ensure that the losses are taken up as liability of the concerned accountable persons until the request for relief from property accountability is submitted and favorably acted upon by the COA;



d)	the Accountant of Maddela Campus and the Supply Officers of Maddela and Cabarroguis Campus must coordinate with the Accounting and Supply Unit of the Diffun Campus to facilitate the identification of those given or transferred PPEs to their respective Campuses for proper recognition in their own books and transfer of the full responsibility and accountability of the said PPEs.  The concerned personnel in the Accounting Unit in Diffun Campus must also draw the corresponding journal entries to record the transfer of the PPE assets given or delivered to the different Campuses to set up proper accountability and responsibility of these.  This will also correct the distorted presentation of distribution of PPE among the three Campuses;



e)	the University Accountant identify those previously recorded PPEs worth below P15,000.00 and reclassify them to the appropriate Semi-expendable accounts and maintain the required records thereof;



f)	the University Accountant require the concerned personnel in the Accounting Unit to maintain the PPE Ledger Cards and the Supply/Property Officer to update the Property Cards pursuant to Section 42, GAM for NGAs, Vol. I.  If warranted, hire or assign personnel to specifically devote work on the identification of the recorded PPEs and preparation of the corresponding Ledger Cards and Property Cards, with the supervision of the Chief Accountant and the designated Supply Officers.  Further, require the two offices to coordinate, on a regular basis, to make the necessary reconciliations and adjustments between the accounting and property records for current year’s PPE purchases to come up with the correct amount of PPE, and to prevent the accumulation of undetected unreconciled balances; and



g)	Management    require the Supply Officers of the three (3) Campuses to conduct timely inventory of PPE and to coordinate with their corresponding Accounting Units for reconciliation thereof, and to submit the complete and reconciled RPCPPE to the Office of the Auditor on time.



	12)		The Management instructed the Accountant of Maddela Campus to correct the entry made in recording the Land account.  They also said that the Accountant of Maddela Campus already secured documents from concerned government agencies as basis for the correct valuation of the Land.

	

	13)		Further, the Management instructed the Supply Office to submit the list of unreported items in 2020.  The Accounting Unit was also instructed to identify those previously recorded PPEs worth below Php15,000.00 and reclassify them to the appropriate Semi-expendable account.





2)	Lapses were committed by the Management in negotiating the procurement of seven (7) infrastructure projects through adjacent contracts amounting to P6,086,553.59 in violation of the provisions of Sections 53 and 54 of Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations (RIRR) of Republic Act (RA) 9184, resulting to possible loss of P93,514.12 and putting the University in a disadvantageous position.



	1)	Section 53.4 of RIRR of RA 9184 requires that where the subject is adjacent or contiguous to an ongoing Infrastructure Project or Consulting Service where the consultants have unique experience and expertise to deliver the required service: Provided, however, That (a) the original contract is the result of a Competitive Bidding; (b) the subject contract to be negotiated has similar or related scopes of work; (c) it is within the contracting capacity of the contractor/consultant; (d) the contractor/consultant uses the same prices or lower unit prices as in the original contract less mobilization cost; (e ) the amount of the continuous or adjacent work involved does not exceed the amount of the ongoing project; and (f) the contractor/consultant has no negative slippage/delay: Provided, further, that negotiations for the procurement of the contiguous or adjacent work are commenced before the expiry of the original contract.



	2)	For CY 2020, the University entered into nine (9) adjacent contracts with different contractors for the procurement of various infrastructure projects.  Two (2) of these were not audited because of the non-submission of their adjacent contract and/or non-submission of the original contract and other relevant documents.



	3)	Nonetheless, pursuant to the above provisions, the Audit Team had conducted an auditorial review of the seven (7) adjacent contracts and noted that three (3) infrastructure projects included some items with higher unit prices than their original contracts, resulting in a difference of P27,378.81, inclusive of mark-ups and value-added taxes (VAT).  Details are presented in Annex G.



	4)	The rules unequivocally state that contractor must use the same prices or lower unit prices as in the original contract, hence, the computed amount constitutes a violation of the said rule and may be disallowed in the audit.



	5)	Furthermore, one of the purposes of entering into an adjacent or contiguous contract is because of the economic advantage as a result of avoidance of expenditures such as mobilization costs, personal protective equipment for the personnel, materials for scaffoldings, which are included in the original contract. However, during the audit, it was noted that two (2) of the projects included the items below under the Construction Safety and Health program even if these were provided in the original contract.  These are Semi-Expendable items that remained useable for the duration of the adjacent contract.  Their inclusion again in the adjacent contract is deemed unnecessary and maybe subjected to disallowance if unjustified.



Project

Items

Direct Cost

Mark Up (15%)

Vat (5%)

Total Disallowable Amount

Construction of Women's Dormitory

 



Safety Shoes

5,000.00 



250.00 

5,250.00 



Safety Gloves

5,000.00 

 

250.00 

      5,250.00 



Safety Helmet

7,000.00 

 

350.00 

      7,350.00 



Medicine Kit

7,139.29 

 

356.96 

7,496.25

Subtotal

 

 24,139.29 

 

1,206.96 

    25,346.25 

Improvement of Administration Building (JAAH)

Details Not provided

33,779.76 

    5,066.96 

1942.336

   40,789.06 

Subtotal

 

33,779.76 

5,066.96 

1,942.34 

    40,789.06 

GRAND TOTAL

57,919.05 

5,066.96 

3,149.30 

66,135.31 



	6)	It is also observed that the safety helmets and medicine kits under the Construction of Women’s Dormitory project were quoted at P5,000.00 each in the original contract while they are quoted at P7,000.00 and P7,139.29, respectively in the new contract.  On other hand, the Improvement of Administration Building (JAAH) provides P53,854.50 for 1,200 man-days or P44.88 per man-day on its original contract, while the new contract provides P40,789.06 for 900 man-days or P45.32 per man-day based on the available documents.  The scope under the new contract was not provided in the submitted documents, but evidently, the cost of the new contract is higher than the original contract, which as discussed above violates rules and regulations.



	7)	Moreover, Section V(D)(4) of Annex H of the RIRR prescribes, among others, that the Procuring Entity shall ensure that the unit prices of the new items are equal to or lower than the prevailing market price.



	8)	Relatively, there are new items that are introduced in the new contracts amounting to P1,525,848.46 (Annex H).  Examination of the submitted documents did not provide detailed evaluation of the scope of works or terms of reference, unit prices and other terms and conditions of the contracts as evidenced by the absence of an Evaluation Report by the Technical Working Group (TWG).  There is no evidence that prices were canvassed for the determination of the prevailing market prices.  The new prices were based on the Detailed Unit Price Analysis (DUPA) which is only an estimate of the cost of scope of works.  The absence of knowledge of the prevailing market prices implies that the prices in the new contract cannot be ascertained to be the most favorable or advantageous prices.  For this reason, the purpose of entering into an adjacent or contiguous contract for economic reasons is not achieved.



	9)	Detailed analysis of the new items further disclosed that there were movable Furniture and Fixtures and other equipment included among the items pertaining to the construction/improvement of buildings.  These are the following:



 Project

Particulars

Qty

Unit

 Unit Cost 

Total Cost

Construction of Women's Dormitory - Cabarroguis Campus

Hanging Cabinet (3.5x.4x.4m)

3

unit

16,000.00 

48,000.00 



Wooden Cabinet (Closet)

5

Unit

23,000.00 

115,000.00 



Study Table with Chair

5

Unit

4,000.00 

  20,000.00 



Customized Double Deck

5

Unit

15,000.00 

  75,000.00 



Long table with 5 chairs

5

set

15,000.00 

  75,000.00 

Subtotal

 





 

333,000.00 

Improvement of Old CHIM Building - Maddela Campus

Projector device

1

set

  2,000.00 

  2,000.00 



Speaker

4

set

   3,000.00 

12,000.00 



Wireless Microphone

2

set

  1,000.00 

    2,000.00 



Office Table with Single Chair Unit

4

set

     2,000.00 

    8,000.00 



Mono Bloc (Classmate Chair)

20

pc

      250.00 

  5,000.00 



0.40 mxlx2.00M file cabinets

4

pc

  3,000.00 

  12,000.00 

Subtotal

 

 

 

 

  41,000.00 

TOTAL

 

 

 

 

374,000.00 



	10)	For Furniture and Fixtures to be attributed as part of the building, they must be included in the Program of Works as permanent fixtures to the building. It means that labor and materials are programmed for its construction or provision and these are affixed to the building itself and should not be movable.  Otherwise, these are considered as Furniture and Fixtures, and not directly attributed to the construction of the building.  Considering the programming of the items, it is apparent that these refer to movable Furniture and Fixtures and other equipment, and should not be charged to the budget allotted for the construction or improvement of the building.



	11)	Also, the same Annex of the RIRR provides that in case of successful negotiation, the Bids and Awards Committee (BAC) shall recommend to the Head of the Procuring Entity (HoPE) the award of the contract in favor of the contractor in accordance with Section IV (L).



	12)	Section IV (L) provides that:



1)	Except in Shopping, and Negotiated Procurement through Emergency Cases, Agency-to-Agency and Small Value Procurement, the following procedures shall apply in the issuance of the Notice of Award (NOA), Contract/Purchase Order (PO) and Notice to Proceed (NTP) for the Alternative Methods of Procurement identified in this Guidelines, thus: 



a)	The BAC shall recommend to the HOPE the award of contract. Within a period not exceeding fifteen (15) calendar days from receipt, the HOPE shall approve or disapprove the BAC’s recommendation. In case of approval, the HOPE shall immediately issue the NOA to the Supplier, Contractor or Consultant.  In the event the HOPE shall disapprove the recommendation, such disapproval shall be based only on valid, reasonable, and justifiable grounds to be expressed in writing, addressed to the BAC.



b)	The Supplier, Contractor or Consultant shall immediately enter into a contract with the Procuring Entity upon receipt of the NOA. Upon transmission of the signed contract/PO, the HOPE or his duly authorized representative shall immediately sign the contract/PO provided that all the relevant documentary requirements are submitted.



c)	The HOPE or his duly authorized representative shall issue the NTP, if necessary, and a copy of the approved contract to the Supplier, Contractor or Consultant within three (3) calendar days from the date of approval of the contract by the appropriate government approving authority.



2)	Posting of NOA, Contract and NTP. Unless the contract involves and affects national security as determined by the HOPE in accordance with Section IV(D) of this Guidelines, the BAC, through its Secretariat, shall post the NOA, Contract/PO, including the NTP if necessary, for information purposes, in the PhilGEPS website, the website of the Procuring Entity concerned, if available, and at any conspicuous place reserved for this purpose in the premises of the Procuring Entity within ten (10) days from their issuance, except for contracts with ABC of Fifty Thousand Pesos (P50,000.00) and below.



	13)	The audit disclosed that upon approval by the HOPE to award the contract, there were no NOA and NTP issued to the Contractors.  Instead, POs were issued which served as the contract of agreement between the University and the Contractors.  The POs are the only document where the Contractors have their signature when it comes to adjacent projects.  Scrutiny of the POs revealed the following deficiencies:



	a)	These were not signed by the Accountant as to the availability of funds.



The Certification of Availability of Funds (CAF) is required before entering into a contract of agreement under Section 86 of PD 1445.  Contracts not so witnessed or not supported by a CAF shall be considered null and void according to LOI 968 and Sec. 87 of PD 1445. 



	b)	Information on the POs neither identifies the specifications and the detailed scope of works to be done nor the items to be installed or constructed or other conditions of the contract.  The items were stated generally like demolition works, ceiling works, painting works and the like.



Non-identification of the detailed scope of works means absence of point of reference to measure the actual accomplishment of the Contractor.  In case of dispute, such as when the Contractors have poor accomplishment or deficient accomplishment, the University may not be able to demand rectification or completion due to lack of detailed specifications and conditions in the contract.  Thus, instead of PO, a narrative contract of agreement specifying all the detailed scope of works and other relevant conditions of the contract must be prepared and duly signed by the concerned parties.



	14)	Also, according to Section IV (L), upon transmission of the signed contract/PO, the HOPE or his duly authorized representative shall immediately sign the contract/PO provided that all the relevant documentary requirements are submitted.   Among the required document is the posting of performance security prior to signing the contract.  However, the Contractors of the adjacent contracts were not required to submit the performance security, thus, faithful performance of the contractor is not guaranteed and any losses or damages suffered by the University due to defaulting Contractors may not be recovered.



	15)	Lastly, the Manual of Procedures for the Procurement of Infrastructure Projects provides that no Program of Work for any project shall be approved without detailed engineering. The Program of Work shall include, among other things, estimates of the work, items, quantities and costs and a PERT/CPM network of the project activities.



	16)	Contrary thereto, the Programs of Works of the adjacent or contiguous projects were not presented in detail.  Description of works to be done and estimated cost of the projects simply labeled as “Building” and “Miscellaneous” which is open to varying interpretation for its ambiguity and general connotation. These were not also accompanied by PERT/CPM.  The Programs of Works are the necessary reference point for how the works will be carried out or they can be used to impose obligations to deliver the works in a certain way and by certain dates.  It is imperative that the scope of works indicated therein will form part of the contract of agreement.



	17)	Evidently, the discussions above showed the non-compliance of the BAC, TWG and other concerned personnel to the procedures prescribed by RA 9184 in terms of preparation, evaluation and awarding of adjacent or contiguous projects.   These procedural lapses obviously put the University in an unfavorable situation and more so, may result in financial losses which may be subjected to disallowance.



	18)	We recommended that Management instruct the:



a)	Engineers In-charge to prepare the Programs of Works in details, supported with Detailed Engineering, PERT/CPM and others, as reference for the Scope of Work to be negotiated and must be included as part of the contract of agreement;



b)	Budget Officer to realign the charging of movable furniture and fixtures and other equipment included on construction/improvement of buildings to their appropriate budget allocations;



c)	BAC or another authorized person to communicate to the Contractor the adjustment of the prices of those items with higher unit prices than its original contract amounting to P105,528.22, otherwise, this will be disallowed in the audit; and



d)	BAC, TWG and other concerned personnel to evaluate carefully the scope of work, unit prices, terms of references and other conditions of the contract before awarding them to the Contractors and to adhere to the provisions of Section 53 of RA 9184, particularly concerning the adjacent or contiguous contracts;



e)	HOPE or other authorized people to carefully craft the Contract of Agreement, instead of POs, to include among others, the Detailed Scope of Works, duration, specifications and other conditions necessary to procure certain projects; and



f)	Accounting Unit to properly pre-audit the payments of these adjacent contracts to ensure that only those allowed according to the rules and regulations are paid.



	19)	The Management scrutinized the documents of the projects and found out that there are indeed some items with higher unit prices or costs than the original contracts.  For the new items that were included in the DUPA of the adjacent contracts, the procedure as discussed in the audit finding shall be taken into consideration by the Management.



	20)	With regard to the movable Furniture and Fixtures and other equipment that were included in the various projects, the Physical Plant and Site Development (PPSD) Division will provide detailed estimate of the Furniture and Fixtures and change the items into carpentry works.  For those items that should not form part of the adjacent contracts, change order/variation order will be resorted to.



	21)	With regard to the provision of Safety and Health Programs which were included in the adjacent contracts of two projects, we believe that these are necessary expenses as the adjacent contracts may need additional workforce in their implementation.  These contracts have their own duration and that they are implemented concurrently with the original contracts.  In addition, at this time of pandemic, reusable items are not advisable to be used by any other person other than the original user, to prevent the spread of Corona Virus.



	22)	Management emphasized that the adjacent contracts had been executed following the provision of RA 9184 and that the Contractors have been made aware of these provisions specifically on the provision where the unit prices in the adjacent contract shall not be higher than the unit prices in the original contract.  However, lapses in the implementation did occur and they assured the Commission that they will do everything to correct the lapses that had been committed.  



	23)	The Management is reminded on the provisions of RA 9184 pertaining to Variation Orders, to wit:



“Variation Orders may be issued by the procuring entity to cover any increase/decrease in quantities, including the introduction of new work items that are not included in the original contract or reclassification of work items that are either due to change of plans, design or alignment to suit actual field conditions resulting in disparity between the preconstruction plans used for purposes of bidding and the “as staked plans” or construction drawings prepared after a joint survey by the contractor and the Government after award of the contract.”



	24)	In other words, variation order cannot be resorted to replace items that are erroneously charged to the budget of construction or improvement of certain buildings which are not directly related thereto like those PPEs mentioned above.  Variation orders can only be availed if there are changes in plan or design due to unseen conditions that were already present even before a building is constructed.  The addition and deletion of works under Variation Orders should be within the general scope of the project as bid and awarded.



	25)	Furthermore, as regards the provision of Safety and Health Programs, we would like to point out that of all the seven (7) adjacent contracts that we have reviewed, only two (2) of them provided for additional cost for Safety and Health Program.  This implied that provision thereof can be negotiated and avoided as evidenced by how the five (5) other contracts were awarded.  Also, we agree that extra caution must be administered in this time of pandemic, however, it should also be at this time that Management should be more prudent in the use of government funds so that any savings can be contributed to the efforts of defeating this virus.  Economical ways, such as disinfecting items and reusing them for the same endeavor, are encouraged and mandated. 



	26)	Therefore, we reiterated the audit recommendations above.





3)	The project “QSU Cabarroguis Underground Electrical System-Phase I” was awarded to a Contractor who has submitted deficient bid proposal as to Bill of Quantity which is non-compliant with the provisions of 2016 RIRR of RA 9184.



	1)	Clause 15.2 of the Instruction to Bidders (ITB) of the Project “QSU Cabarroguis-Underground Electrical System Phase-1 (Concrete Works) states that the Bidder shall fill in rates and prices for all items of the Works described in the Bill of Quantities.  Bids not addressing or providing all of the required items in the Bidding Documents including, where applicable, Bill of Quantities, shall be considered non-responsive and, thus, automatically disqualified.



	2)	Relevantly, Section 32.2.1 of RIRR of RA 9184 mandates the BAC to ascertain the completeness of the bid, and thus states:



	“Unless the Instructions to Bidders specifically allow partial bids, bids not addressing or providing all of the required items in the Bidding Documents including, where applicable, bill of quantities, shall be considered non-responsive and, thus, automatically disqualified.” 



	3)	The same section also provides leniency for arithmetical errors, as follows:

	“Consider computational errors and omissions to enable proper comparison of all eligible bids. It may also consider bid modifications if expressly allowed in the Bidding Documents. Any adjustment shall be calculated in monetary terms to determine the calculated prices.” 

	

	4)	Contract review of the on-going project “QSU Cabarroguis Underground Electrical System-Phase I” showed that there is a discrepancy between the submitted financial bid price by Contractor and the Contract of Agreement of the project amounting to P322,817.73, computed as follows:



Financial Bid Price submitted by the Contractor

P

  3,771,148.36 

Contract of Agreement



  4,093,966.09 

Difference

P

(   322,817.73 )



	5)	Scrutiny of the bidding documents showed the same discrepancy between Bid Prices as Read Out and Bid Prices as Calculated.  Investigation of the discrepancy showed that the submitted bill of quantities of the contractor was deficient in one item as follows:



Item

Description

Unit

Per Bid Document By The Agency

 Per Financial Bid Submitted By The Contractor 

Differ-ence In Qty

Unit Cost

Total Cost

I 

Excavation and Backfilling

l.s.

1

1 

0 

 

 

II

Demolition

l.s.

1

1 

0 

 

 

III

Structural – Manholes

cu.m

68

52 

14 

23,058.41 

322,817.74 

IV

Structural - Duck Bank

cu.m

54

54 

0 

 

 

V

Structural - Pedestal Poles

Unit

2

2 

0 

 

 

VI

Structural – Powerhouse

l.s.

1

1 

0 

 

 

SPL 1

Construction Safety and Health Program

m-days

1200

1200 

0 

 

 

SPL 2

Progress Photograph and Project Bulletin

l.s.

1

1 

0 

 

 

 

TOTAL

 

 

 

14 

23,058.41 

322,817.74

             *the difference of 0.01 is due to rounding off



	6)	Clause 27.3 of the Bid Data Sheet (BDS) of the bidding documents requires that partial bid is not allowed and that the infrastructure project is packaged in a single lot and the lot shall not be divided into sub-lots for the purpose of bidding, evaluation and contract award.



	7)	Clause 15. 2 of the ITB and Clause 27.3 of the BDS clearly prohibit incomplete or deficient bid of items of the components of the projects.  They also imply that modification is also not accepted.  Thus, pursuant to the provision of RIRR of RA 9184 above, the Contractor should have been considered as non-responsive and disqualified.  The deficiency may not also be regarded as arithmetical error because the computations were all correct and proper, and the same items were reflected on the Detailed Unit Price Analysis (DUPA).  If it is indeed an error, it is a negligent error on the part of the Contractor and his bid should have been considered non-responsive.



	8)	Despite this, the TWG proceeded to calculate the bid using the correct bill of quantities.  The TWG justified their actions based on the fact that the calculated bid did not exceed the Approved Budget for the Contract (ABC) and the Contractor remained the lowest bidder despite the adjustments made. Furthermore, they considered the discrepancy as arithmetical error, thus, marked the bidder as responsive.



	9)	Consequently, the calculated bid price amounting to P4,093,966.069 was higher than the submitted bid price of P3,771,148.36, resulting to a discrepancy of P322,817.73.  The calculated bid price was the basis for the BAC in declaring the Lowest Calculated Responsive Bid (LCRB) as evaluated by the TWG and was subsequently used by the HoPE in awarding the contract.



	10)	This contravenes the provision of the Item 34.4 of the same RIRR which provides that if the BAC determines that the bidder with the Lowest Calculated Bid  (LCB) passes all the criteria for post-qualification, it shall declare the said bid as the LCRB, and recommend to the HoPE the award of contract to the said bidder at its submitted bid price or its calculated bid price, whichever is lower. The submitted BAC Resolutions neither discussed how the discrepancies were addressed, nor provided justifications for recommending the calculated bid price instead of the submitted bid price.



	11)		Though the amount of contract is still more economical by P791,004.70 when the BAC proceeded with the Contractor despite the issues noted above, considering that the next lowest responsive bidder submitted a bid of P4,884,970.36, the possible protests or legal repercussions for not disqualifying one bidder when the law mandates so, particularly one which may be raised by the losing bidder,  places the University in an inimical situation. Protests or legal disputes may require legal representations which require financial burden on the University and may bring unnecessary stress or strain to the persons involved in the procurement.  Also, the Management must not forget that as a government institution, it has to strive and it must have utmost regard for a fair and honest platform in all its dealings with its stakeholders.



	12)	May we also remind that the Procuring Entity is required to comply with the provisions of RA 9184 and to see to it that that the bidding documents reflect the same instruction. Non-compliance with said requirement amounts to the failure of the BAC to comply with the requirements of the present law and its associated rules and guidelines, which may result in the disallowance by the Commission on Audit and the likely imposition of applicable administrative, civil, and criminal sanctions.

	13)	We recommended that:



a)	Management must investigate the procedures undertaken by the TWG and impose proper and applicable administrative, civil and criminal sanctions, if warranted, against the erring officials for their failure to comply with existing procurement law, rules, and regulations;



b)	BAC must be more circumspect in accepting the report of the TWG and include in its Resolutions issues resolved in arriving at their decisions or recommendations;



c)	TWG must judiciously and effectively conduct the evaluation of the submitted bids and the assertions made by the bidders as stated on the submitted documents in adherence to rules and regulations prescribed by RA 9184; and



d)	BAC, TWG and the Procurement personnel must apprise themselves of the rules and regulations of the bidding procedures to dispatch their mandate effectively.



	14)		The Management has investigated the matter and found out that there has been a misinterpretation of the procurement provision specifically on the "Bid as Calculated" portion of the bid. They said that TWG followed the "Bid as Calculated" amount not the "Bid as Read" with the notion that "Bid as Calculated" amount should be followed in awarding the contract. They commented that the TWG and the BAC had no intention to dishonor the process or to put the government at a disadvantaged position.

	

	15)		In addition, the Management contended that even if the "Bid as Calculated" amount has been followed, the adjusted bid proposal of the contractor is still the LCB and more economical to the University.  However, they said that this matter will still be communicated to the bidder to solve the matter.

	

	16)		Also, the Management has instructed all personnel involved in procurement to be more judicious and effective in the conduct of bid evaluation and post qualification.

	

	17)		Moreover, the Management has designed a training activity on procurement with the approval of GPPB to enhance the knowledge and capability of all the people involved in the procurement process.





4)	Lapses in the bidding process were committed by the Management contrary to various revised implementing rules and regulations of RA 9184 and some documentary requirements were not submitted or prepared by the Procurement Office/BAC which precluded the Audit Team from determining their compliance to the process prescribed by RA 9184. 



	1)	Auditorial review of the ten (10) infrastructure projects procured by the University for the CY 2020, namely below, was conducted.



 

Project

Location

Amount

1

Improvement of Administration Building - Maddela Campus

QSU Maddela Campus

 4,213,685.24 

2

Improvement of Administration Building (JAA Hall)

QSU Diffun Campus

 3,188,284.06 

3

Improvement of Agriculture Building (Diffun Campus)

QSU Diffun Campus

 3,061,379.18 

4

Improvement of Farm Mechanics Building (Diffun Campus)

QSU Diffun Campus

 2,765,570.07 

5

Improvement of Gymnasium (Maddela Campus)

QSU Maddela Campus

 3,620,991.24 

6

Improvement of Old CHIM Building (Maddela Campus)

QSU Maddela Campus

 3,158,352.61 

7

Construction of Seventy Spans concrete Fence

QSU Diffun Campus

    901,532.22 

8

Underground Electrical System Phase-I

QSU Cabarroguis Campus

 4,093,966.09 

9

Construction of Women's Dormitory

QSU Cabarroguis Campus

 7,264,434.88 

10

Upgrading of Banana Tissue Nursery (GB Carlos)

QSU Diffun Campus

 1,639,335.33 



	2)	The following documents were regularly submitted by the Management for contract review:



a. 

Detailed Quantity and Cost Estimates/Detailed Unit Price Analysis (DUPA)

b.

Program of Works (POW)

c.

Approved Budget for Contract (ABC)

d.

Completed Bidding Documents



1. Invitation to Bid (IB)



2. Instruction to Bid (ITB)



3. Bid Data Sheet (BDS)



4. General Conditions of the Contract (GCC)



5. Special Conditions of the Contract (SCC)



6. Specifications (Indicate NONE if there's no specifications required/needed)



7. Drawings



8. Bill of Quantities



9. Bidding Forms

e.

Advertisement



1. Printout copies on advertisement posted in PHilGEPS

f.

Issuance of Bid Documents



1. Approved Bid Documents

g.

Pre-Bid Conference



1. Duly received invitation to three observers: 



1.1. COA



1.2. Duly recognized Private Group



1.3. Non-Government Organization (NGO)



2. Minutes of the Pre-Bid Conference

h.

Opening and Preliminary Examination of Bids



1. Duly received invitation to three observers: (If same as those with Pre-bid Conference, no need to attach)



1.1. COA



1.2. Duly recognized Private Group



1.3. Non-Government Organization (NGO)



2. Envelope 1 (Eligibility and Technical Requirements)



3. Envelope 2 (Financial documents)



4. Duly signed Abstract of Bids as Read



5. Minutes of Submission, Receipt and Opening of Bids

i.

Detailed Evaluation of Bids



1. Abstract of Bids as Calculated



2. TWG Report on the Detailed Bid Evaluation for determination on the bidder with the LCB, as reviewed by the BAC

j.

Post-Qualification of the LCB



1. Duly received invitation to three observers: (If same as those with Pre-bid Conference, no 

     need to attach)



1.1. COA



1.2. Duly recognized Private Group



1.3. Non-Government Organization (NGO)



2. Submission of additional requirements within 3 cd from receipt of the notice from the 

    BAC that the bidder has the LCB



2.1. Latest income and business tax returns



2.2. Certificate of PhilGEPS Registration



2.3. Other Appropriate licenses and permits required by law and stated in the Bidding 

       Documents



4. Resolution of BAC adopting and confirming the TWG Post-Qualification Evaluation 

    Report and declaring the LCRB



6. BAC Resolution Declaring the LCRB and Recommending Approval by the HOPE

k.

Award of Contract



1. duly received Contract of Award (date of receipt must be indicated)

l.

Contract Preparation and Signing and NTP



1. Perfected Contract, in standard form. Must be duly dated, signed by all parties, and 

    Notarized



2. Performance Security (Cash, Cashier's/Manager's Check, bank draft/guarantee, irrevocable   

    letter of credit, surety bond, or combination hereof)



3. Other supporting documents of the contract



3.1 Construction schedule and S-curve



3.2 Manpower schedule



3.3. Construction Methods



3.4 Equipment Utilization schedule



3.5. Construction safety and health program approved by the DOLE



3.6. PERT/CPM



4. Duly received NTP.  Date of receipt must be indicated

  

	3)	However, the following projects were found lacking some of the documents above:  



Projects

Unsubmitted Documents

Improvement of Old CHIM Building - Maddela Campus

Detailed Quantity and Cost Estimates/Detailed Unit Price Analysis (DUPA); Program of Works (POW); Approved Budget for Contract (ABC); 1. Printout copies on advertisement posted in PHilGEPS; duly received invitations to Private Organization and NGOs as observers

Improvement of Administration Building (JAA Hall) - Diffun Campus

Specifications; Drawings

 Improvement of Agriculture Building - Diffun Campus

Specifications; Drawings

QSU Cabarroguis Underground Electrical System - Phase I

Duly received invitation to private group organization and NGO as observers; No copy of the approval of HOPE to award the contract

Improvement of Gymnasium - Maddela Campus

Detailed Quantity and Cost Estimates/Detailed Unit Price Analysis (DUPA); Specifications; Duly received invitation to COA, private group organization and NGO as observers

 Improvement of Farm Mechanics Building - Diffun Campus; 

Specifications; Drawings

Upgrading of Banana Tissue Nursery

Duly received invitation to private group organization and NGO as observers

Improvement of Building Administration (Maddela Campus)

Duly received invitation to private group organization and NGO as observers



	4)	Furthermore, scrutiny of the submitted documents showed the following lapses:



a)	In the audit, we have verified that all of the ten (10) projects were included in Annual Procurement Plan (APP) for CY 2020, however, the Project Procurement Management Plan (PPMP) of each project were not submitted.



b)	Most of the approval by the HOPE of the BAC to award the contract to the LCRB were not dated, hence, we cannot verify the timeliness of the notice of awards.



c)	The TWG Evaluation Reports submitted did not indicate that verification of the assertions made by the Contractor on the submitted documents were conducted, but apparently used the “pass or fail” criteria of evaluation.   It has also no indication that it was reviewed by the BAC.

 

The objective of the post-qualification is to verify and validate all the statements made and documents submitted by the bidder with LCB.  This must not only mean physical presence of the documents but careful perusal of their contents and validating their veracity and legality through inquiry to third party persons or agencies, ocular inspections, and other means of validations.  The report must also be thoroughly reviewed by the BAC before determining the LCRB and recommending it to the HOPE for the awarding of the contract.  The report must also be dated as a reckoning point for the timeliness of succeeding activities.  



d)	Three (3) of the contracts of agreement were not duly dated and notarized, as follows:



Project

Remarks

Improvement of Old CHIM Building - Maddela Campus

not dated and notarized

QSU Cabarroguis Underground - Electrical System - Phase 1 (Concrete works)

not dated

Improvement of Gymnasium - Maddela Campus

not dated



	5)	Furthermore, the succeeding documents which are essential for contract review were not submitted:  



a.

Advertisement



1. Printout copies on advertisement posted in Agency Website



2. Certification from the Head of BAC Secretariat on the posting of                  

     advertisement at conspicuous place

b.

Issuance of Bid Documents



1. Evidence on posting of Approved Bid Documents at its website and at  

    the PhilGEPS Website



2. Records of BAC on the issuance of Bid Documents with corresponding 

    official receipt (Only photocopies of OR are submitted)



3. Records on downloading of Bidding Documents from any of the said 

    website with corresponding official receipt paid upon submission of their 

    bids (Only photocopies of OR are submitted)

c.

Detailed Evaluation of Bids



1. Resolution of the BAC adopting and confirming the TWG Detailed Bid 

    Evaluation Report and declaring the LCB

d.

Award of Contract



1. Notification of Bidding Results to the losing bidders



2. Print-out on posting of NOA



a. PhilGEPS



b. Agency Website



c. Conspicuous paces certified by the Head of BAC Secretariat

e.

Contract Preparation and Signing and NTP



1. Print out on posting of NTP



a. PhilGEPS



b. Agency Website



c. Conspicuous paces certified by the Head of BAC Secretariat



	6)	Due to the non-submission of the above documents, our team were not able to determine the following:



a)	Whether the required advertisement was complied pursuant to Section 21.2.1 of RIRR of RA 9184;



b)	Whether the Bidding Documents were made available at its website and at the PhilGEPs website from the time the Invitations to Bid were advertised, pursuant to Section 17.4 of RIRR of RA 9184; 



c)	Whether the BAC implemented the recommendation in the TWG Reports, and the recommendations to the HoPE and notices to the winning and losing bidders, pursuant to Sections 34.2 and 37.1.1; and



d)	Whether the Award of Contract and NTP were posted on the required media, pursuant to Sections 37.1.5 and 37.4.2.



	7)	We recommended that:  



a)	BAC Secretariat should submit all the required documents in order to verify if the process of bidding was strictly adhered to.  We recommend the adoption of the Checklist for Contract Review to facilitate the completeness of the documents to be submitted;



b)	BAC and TWG should address the lapses noted above; and



c)	BAC, TWG, BAC Secretariat and other concerned personnel should strictly adhere to the prescribed procedures of bidding pursuant to RA 9184.



	8)	The Management mentioned that they have discussed the matter with the concerned personnel and instructed them to strictly adhere to the prescribed procedures of bidding pursuant to RA 9184.  In addition, the BAC had agreed to adopt the Checklist for Contract Review to facilitate the completeness of documents to be submitted.





5)	The Management of Maddela Campus authorized the purchase of various construction materials and office supplies amounting to P1,344,527.25 even if the Canvass/Request for Quotations (RFQs) were fabricated in favor of certain supplier/s, casting doubt on the integrity, regularity and legitimacy of the procurements made.



	1)	The procurement of various goods and services of the agency undergoes a series of processes that are essential in obtaining purchases from requisition to POs and approval of invoices. The Supply Officer of Maddela Campus plays an important role in ensuring that legitimate and bona fide suppliers shall participate in the canvass/quotations of prices of various items for purchase. Bona fide means the supplier is of good standing, of known qualifications, and is genuine. This procedure would entail thorough evaluation of the supplier’s background and qualifications to ensure that they are legitimate and bona fide suppliers. 



	2)	However, the results of confirmation of the propriety of canvass and RFQs revealed that seven (7) suppliers did not accomplish the Canvass/RFQ from the QSU-Maddela Campus for the year 2020.  Below are the names and addresses of the suppliers:



a)	MB General Merchandise – located in Maddela, Quirino. The Supplier denied that there were request for price quotations received from QSU Maddela Campus from January to December 2020. They even certified that all the canvass/RFQ from their stores are falsified as evidenced by the forged signature of the store owner which is obviously different from those attached in the canvasses. They are using a rubber stamp to all requests for quotations from their store contrary to the examined Canvass Sheets wherein only the name of the store is written thereat.



b)	CRB Commercial Center – store is located in Maddela, Quirino. The Supplier argued that the registered name of their store is “CRB Commercial” not “CRB Commercial Center”. They certified that all requests for quotations from their stores are also falsified. The signature of the owner is also forged because it is different from those attached in the Canvass Sheets.



c)	Tres Senores – located in Santiago City, Isabela. The correct name of the store is “Tres Senores Advertising” as certified by the store owner. They contended that they received canvass from QSU Diffun Campus only and not from Maddela Campus for the period January to December 2020. They are also using a rubber stamp to all requests for quotations from their store contrary to the examined canvass sheets wherein only the name “Tres Senores” was stamped which showed that the canvass was falsified in favor of the winning Supplier.



d)	LMJR – the store has two branches in Santiago City, Isabela. Both branches denied that they have received canvass or request for price quotations from QSU Maddela Campus for the period January to December 2020. The rubber stamp used in the canvass sheet is totally different from the actual rubber stamp used by the store. The canvass sheet bears the name “LMJR” only while the complete name of the store as evidenced by the sample rubber stamp presented to the audit team is “LMJR General Merchandise”. The signature is obviously different from the actual signature of the store owner/representatives which connotes that the canvass is merely falsified.

e)	E. Garcia House of Curtains – located inside the Public Market in Santiago City, Isabela. The store owner denied that they have received canvass or request for price quotations from QSU Maddela Campus for the period January to December 2020. Examination of the rubber stamp used in the attached canvass sheets as against the actual rubber stamp used by the store revealed that it is totally different, thus, the store was only used in favor of the winning Supplier. The owner even contended that her signature is obviously different from the specimen signature in the Canvass Sheet attached.



f)	Unirank Marketing – located in Santiago City, Isabela. The name of the store is verified as “New Unirank Phones and Gadgets” not “Unirank Marketing”. The audit team verified that it is a sister company of New Santiago Liberty Store, Inc.



g)	Quadkore – located in Santiago City, Isabela. Our inquiry and verification revealed that Quadkore is a computer rental establishment and is not involved in selling any kind of merchandises. A Quadkore personnel said that it is also a sister company of the New Santiago Liberty Store, Inc.



	3)	Aside from the differences in the design of the rubber stamps of the aforementioned suppliers, the Audit Team also noted that the signatures of the owners or their representatives in the Canvass Sheets are different from the actual specimen signatures presented to the audit team during verification of canvass. These suppliers also certified in writing that they did not receive any canvass or RFQs from QSU from January 1 to December 31, 2020.  Therefore, the quoted prices in the Canvass Sheets and RFQs were just fabricated in favor of the winning supplier.



	4)	Out of 225 canvasses examined, 124 or 55.11% amounting to P1,344,527.25 pertains to price quotations from the above-mentioned suppliers which were supported with fabricated canvass/RFQs.  Among the fabricated canvass/RFQs involved the following suppliers:  



Suppliers used on the Fabricated Canvass

Winning Supplier

No. of Incidents

Gross Amount of Affected Account

MB Gen. Merchandise

Buildwise Hardware

71

726,907.75

CRB Commercial Center







Tres Senores

Eusebio Tuzon

20

235,038.00

LMJR







E. Garcia House of Curtains

MBE Espina General Merchandise

1

9,520.00

Unirank Marketing

New Liberty Store

32

373,061.50

Quadkore







TOTAL

124

1,344,527.25

   (See Annex I for detailed information) 

	5)	Our scrutiny of the submitted canvass documents revealed that these suppliers were NEVER awarded as winning bidders for any procurement of Maddela Campus. Their supposed participation is solely on the submission of price quotations of the items under purchase.  However, with the suppliers’ certification that they did not receive any canvass or request for price quotation from QSU Maddela and the non-involvement of the suppliers with the buying and selling of goods being canvassed only showed that the attached canvasses/RFQs were fabricated, and thus nullifies the regularity of the process of the corresponding procurements.



	6)	Moreover, the Supply Officer of Maddela Campus contended that there are only limited suppliers in Maddela, Quirino that could provide their needs for office supplies, constructions materials and other office items. However, during our ocular observation and inspection, we noted that there are several legitimate and bona fide suppliers in the area. These suppliers could have been a possible provider of goods and recipient of canvass or RFQ from the Supply Officer of Maddela Campus instead of sticking to one and the same supplier. This would also give opportunity to local suppliers in Maddela to participate in the bidding and canvass of items under purchase. Our inquiry further disclosed that these suppliers were even eager to enter into transactions with government institutions as they are also willing to accept checks for payment of goods.



	7)	However, our examination showed that almost 100% of office supplies and material needs of Maddela Campus were purchased from New Santiago Liberty Store which is located in Santiago City, Isabela.  As discussed above, the two (2) other suppliers involved in the canvass were not a bona fide suppliers of office supplies, thus, the examined canvass/RFQs from them were falsified in favor of the winning supplier.



	8)	Additionally, we observed that varied construction materials were also being purchased from Buildwise Hardware. Almost 100% of all Canvass/RFQ/s from this store revealed that they are ALWAYS the winning supplier. The two other suppliers namely: MB General Merchandise and CRB Commercial Center are ALWAYS the losing suppliers. Audit confirmation showed that all the canvass sheets from these two suppliers were also falsified in favor of Buildwise Hardware, the winning supplier. Even if the two other suppliers were bona fide and legitimate suppliers of construction materials, canvass and price quotations were NEVER actually requested from them.



	9)	The afore cited observations conclude that these suppliers are being favored, thus, quotations from other suppliers were no longer made or fabrication of canvass or RFQs were done to make them the winning suppliers. The Supply Officer of Maddela Campus admitted that he usually leaves the Canvass Sheets/RFQs to these suppliers and they will fill-out the other Canvass Sheets in their favor.



	10)	The canvassing and request for quotations from suppliers are necessary procurement procedure to determine the most advantageous price that the University can avail for the purchase of goods and services.  However, this cannot be achieved if this is wrongly manipulated in favor of certain suppliers.  The integrity of procurement must be observed in all levels of the procurement process and the Audit Team gives emphasis that the responsibility in ensuring this integrity rests in the BAC of Maddela Campus as mandated by law.



	11)	It is worth mentioning that the governing principles of procurement mandated by the RA 9184 is competitiveness by extending equal opportunity to enable private contracting parties who are eligible and qualified to participate in competitive bidding or other alternative mode of procurements.  Thus, the absence of valid and legitimate canvass of prices deprived the University of the possible economic benefits if price quotations were solicited from suppliers and in the process promoted price competitiveness among them.



	12)	We recommended that Management of Maddela Campus:



a)	ensure that the procurement process is being followed pursuant to the provisions of RA 9184 and other applicable law, rules and regulations before any contract is awarded to the winning suppliers;



b)	require the Supply Officer to discontinue the practice of fabricating Canvass or RFQ in favor of certain supplier/s.  Oblige him to canvass prices and/or request for quotations from at least three (3) suppliers of known qualifications, if needed, and always ensure the legitimacy and veracity of all canvass and RFQs;



c)	investigate the conspiracy between the Supply Officer and the suppliers in the falsification of canvasses and if warranted, to blacklist the same from the rosters of the University’s suppliers pursuant to rules and regulations; and



d)	require the Supply Officer to submit justification/s why canvass of prices and/or RFQ from at least three (3) suppliers of known qualifications were not made and why he should not be charged administratively pursuant to Revised Penal Code.



	13)	The Management replied that they have instructed the Supply Office of Maddela Campus to be stricter in adhering to the rules and regulations of RA 9184.  Also, the Supply Officer of Maddela expressed his sincerest intention to discontinue the practice of fabricating Canvass or RFQs in favor of certain supplier/s. He was instructed to canvass price and/or request for quotation from at least three (3) suppliers of known qualifications to ensure its legitimacy and veracity.



	14)	Moreover, the Management investigated the matter and contended that some of those canvasses were not made by the present Supply Officer but those vouchers were those unprocessed payment left by the previous Supply Officer. They even explained that the fabricated canvasses/RFQs were not made by the Supply Office rather, by the suppliers and those canvasses were processed in order to meet the immediate need of the University.  Further, the Supply Officer commented that he had considered the immediate needs of the end-users.  Lastly, the Supply Officer raised his difficulty in getting canvass from other supplier because they don't usually want to transact with the government due to its "Payment First Policy".  Nevertheless, the Management instructed the Supply Office to craft procedures in order to use per line item scheme in order to attract more suppliers.



	15)	The Audit Team appreciated the Management’s response to discontinue the practice of fabricating canvasses.  However, the Team would like to stress that even though some of the procurements with fabricated canvasses were processed by the previous Supply Officer, this practice was continued by the current Supply Officer as shown in the audit.  This was also admitted by the Supply Officer himself.   And even if the fabricated canvasses were not made by the Supply Officer but by the suppliers, this would not happen without the consent of the Supply Officer who is in-charge of canvassing for prices.  His non-performance of his function to canvass and/or request for quotations from other existing suppliers, and conniving with the favored suppliers for the accomplishment thereof speak volume of his departure from his faithful adherence to law, rules and regulations that resulted to the proliferation of fabricated canvasses.  Thus, the Management of Maddela cannot lay the blame on the suppliers alone because this practice will not prosper if the Supply Officer faithfully administered his function and did not depart from his duty to ascertain the regularity of the process of canvassing and/or requesting for price quotations from suppliers.



	16)	With respect to the difficulty of canvassing due to “payment first policy” of some suppliers, this was already countered by the Audit Team’s validation as discussed above.  The Team view this as unwarranted alibi which could become vehicle for commission of irregularities in the procurement process and which could potentially result to fraud or misappropriation.  Hence, we further recommended the cessation of the adoption of such policy and ensure that deliveries of goods are made first before processing any payment to the suppliers.





6)	Goods amounting to P1,127,651.00 were purchased from suppliers whose existence is doubtful due to the absence of legally, currently operating physical store, contrary to the provision of RA 9184.



	1)	We must stress that RA 9184 requires that procurements must be purchased from bona fide suppliers of known technical, legal and financial qualifications.  Bona fide means the supplier is of good standing (on time deliveries, no delays), of known qualifications (good quality of products), and is genuine.  Genuineness connotes that they must be legitimately trading or operating as indicated in their legal documents and business permits, not just in papers but also in actuality.  One obvious proof of their authenticity is the existence of an actual operating store that markets its products to the public.  



	2)	Together with the personnel from the Procurement Office, we have conducted validation of suppliers of Diffun and Cabarroguis Campus, during which we have gathered the subsequent facts:



Name of Supplier

Observations/Remarks

KM334 ENTERPRISES

 

--	 Located in Brgy Malvar, San Isidro, Isabela



--	Physical store was closed and its current state showed that it wasn't used for quite a while  



--	Nearby stall owners/sellers refute that the store was operating.  The store was closed since the onset of pandemic



--	Through phone call made by the Procurement Officer who was with us during the inspection, the owner said that the stocks were stored in the store which we have verified to be unused for quite a while based on its physical state.



--	Registered under Feliza Agustin-Hong

RGB ENTERPRISES & AGRIVET SUPPLY

--	Located in Brgy. Malvar, Santiago City



--	there is no physical store but a residential house.  A portion of the residential house was transformed into an area that served as an office.



--	Inspection of stocks showed 1 unit of table printer and few sets of inks displayed on top of the table



--	Registered under Severino Q. Molina



	3)	These suppliers, though completely supported with legitimate papers such as BIR Registrations, business permits, etc. and were even registered with the PhilGEPS, are not bona fide suppliers because of the absence of an existing and operating store as found out during the ocular inspection.



	4)	We would like to reiterate and emphasize once more that mere registration with PhilGEPS does not automatically mean that a supplier is legitimate and has the capability to deliver quality goods to the Procuring Entity.  It is for this reason that the BAC or its authorized representative such as personnel from the Procurement Office must validate the supplier’s authenticity, technical, legal and financial capability to supply and deliver the goods and their accessories to be procured.



	5)	Despite the doubtful existence of these stores, we noted that twenty-seven (27) incidents of procurement for the CY 2020 was made by the Procuring Office to purchase various goods for the different projects and activities of the University, broken down below:



Supplier

No. of Incidents

Amount

KM334 Enterprises

18

 P      708,492.00 

RGB Enterprises & AGRIVET Supply

9

     419,159.00 

TOTAL

27

P   1,127,651.00 

   	(See Annex J for details)  



	6)	Further, some allegations regarding the KM334 Enterprises say that the owner allowed the use of its business name by other person.  The proprietress of the KM334 indicated in the official receipts attached to the voucher is Ms. Feliza Agusting Hong. Scrutiny of the documents, particularly the canvass sheets would show that quotations were provided by certain Ms. Glena V. Tabinas.  Investigation revealed that Ms. Tabinas is a resident of Cordon, Isabela, and her connection with KM334 Enterprises is not known and cannot be validated.  Although, this information will not conclusively corroborate the allegations being raised against the KM334 Enterprises, this casts doubt on the integrity, legality and genuineness of the store and the person transacting with the University.



	7)	The problem with purchasing goods from non-bonafide supplier is that it would entail higher price for the goods because of the transfer costs and the profits from one supplier to another will be added to the cost of the goods.  Additionally, the quality of products will be compromised because the supplier will just outsource the supplies to whoever would offer a lowest price and would give him a larger profit.  Besides, in case of defects or repairs in the future, warranties or return may not become possible since these are not transferrable from one buyer to another.



	8)	Transparency and integrity in government operations are widely regarded as an important precondition for fiscal sustainability, good governance, and overall fiscal rectitude.  Thus, it is of paramount importance to uphold these in all dealings of the University such as the procurement of goods, services and infrastructures.  To say the least, the Management must deal only with suppliers or contractors with integrity and known to be legitimate and authentic.  Suppliers with doubtful existence or questionable circumstances must not be patronized and procurements from them must be stopped at once.



	9)	We recommended that Management shall:



a)	deal only with suppliers or contractors with integrity and known to be legitimate and authentic and directly engaged in selling the products being procured;  

b)	validate the existence of roster of suppliers to ensure that the University is dealing with legitimate, genuine and technically capable suppliers or contractors, through verification of their submitted documents and existence of currently operating stores and are not fly by night dealers/suppliers;



c)	lastly, blacklist from the roster those suppliers who have no existing store and stop patronizing their products.



	10)	The Procuring Office requested the consideration of their failure to validate the University's suppliers especially for the year 2020 due to the strict imposition of restrictions of going out from one place to another due to the COVID 19 pandemic.



	11)	Also, the Procuring Office commented that purchases from KM334 Enterprises and RGB Enterprises were made prior to validation by the Audit Team and Procuring Office on December 17, 2020. They even contended that procurement from these Suppliers were totally stopped after validation and started to adopt the COA recommendation even before receiving the AOM.



	12)	Moreover, the Procuring Office contested the idea that the purchased of goods from "non-bonafide" suppliers would always entail a high price due to transfer costs and profits added to the costs of their goods being delivered to the University. They commented that most of goods purchased from KM334 Enterprises and RGB Enterprises were regular office supplies. The Procuring Office believed that they might have lapses with the validation of supplier, however they affirmed that three (3) price quotations were obtained and the said "non-bonafide" suppliers had the lowest bids showed from the attached "abstract as calculated" of the said transactions.



	13)	Henceforth, the Management, Procuring Office and all other concerned personnel assured the Audit Team that they will earnestly adopt all the recommendations.



	14)	The Audit Team thanked the Management and the Procuring Office for their assurance to adopt all the audit recommendations.   However, we refuted their statement that procurements from these suppliers were already stopped after the validation on December 17, 2020.  It can be seen in Audit Finding No. 14 that four (4) procurements amounting to P65,037.00 were still processed and recorded as Accounts Payable even after the joint validation were made.  These transactions were all under the name of KM 334 Enterprises.



	15)	Also, the Procuring Office’s contention that the purchased goods from doubtful suppliers would not entail a higher price is misplaced.  Whether they offer the lowest bid compared to others is of no issue.  While it could be true that canvass from these non-bonafide suppliers have the lowest bids, it does not guarantee that their prices were the most competitive and advantageous to the government, considering their circumstances. Naturally and logically, these unqualified and non-bonafide entities that only serve as brokers will have to profit from the transactions they make. The transfer from one supplier to another entail additional costs and additional profit to every supplier.  Needless to say, these additions will all eventually be transferred to the University when it buys goods from them. Regardless if these non-bonafide suppliers yielded the lowest bids or not, their participation will expose the University to unnecessary risk and disadvantages, prejudicial to its best interest.   





7)	Liquidated damages were not imposed on various suppliers who incurred delays in the delivery of office supplies, construction materials and equipment, contrary to provisions of Annex D, Section 3.1 of the RIRR of RA No. 9184.



	1)	Section 3.1 of the Annex “D” of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 explicitly states that:



	“When the supplier fails to satisfactorily deliver goods under the contract within the specified delivery schedule, inclusive of duly granted time extension, if any, the supplier shall be liable for damages, not by way of penalty, an amount equal to one-tenth (1/10) of one percent (1%) of the cost of the delayed goods scheduled for delivery for every day of delay until such goods are finally delivered and accepted by the procuring entity concerned.” 



	2)	Audit of the disbursement vouchers of the Diffun Campus for the payment of various goods showed that there were late deliveries, however, the Accounting Office did not impose and deduct the corresponding liquidated damages on the payment to the various Suppliers as a result of the late deliveries contrary to the above provision. The liquidated damages computed are shown below:



DV No.

Supplier

Delay (in days)

 Computed Liquidated Damages 

01M-2019-08-000849

Amazing Computer System and Enterprises

10

  P    2,332.00 

01-2019-10-001218

Fims Enterprises

8

        2,377.92 

01-2019-10-001299

LB Gepilano Hardware and Agri-Supply

11

        1,127.50 

01-2019-10-001212

AMC Hardware and Gen Mdse

51

        8,386.95 

 TOTAL

 

 

  P  14,224.37 



	3)	Verification of the supporting documents revealed that the University had already fully paid these suppliers upon complete delivery of procured items without deducting the computed liquidated damages.  Also, scrutiny of other documents disclosed that suppliers usually delivered 8-51 days late compared to the date of delivery as stated in the Approved Contracts.

	4)	Based on the examined vouchers, only 20% or P143,732.22 worth of procurements were determined to be delivered in accordance with the terms of their respective PO.  The remaining balance is either delayed or cannot be determined due to deficiencies in their supporting documents, to wit:



 

No. of Incidents

Amount Involved

Delivered within the term/period

3

    P   143,732.22 

Delayed Delivery

4

     156,915.02 

Cannot be Determined

8

      94,736.08 

TOTAL

15

P  395,383.32 

(See Annex K for details)



	5)	Further, the audit of the disbursement vouchers of Maddela Campus for the payment of various procurements from different funds revealed that crucial information such as the date of acknowledgment of receipt of PO by the suppliers and final date of delivery of goods were not provided as summarized in the table below:



 

No. of Incidents

%

Amount

PO duly received

2

2.38%

4,007.50

PO not duly received and not dated

1

1.19%

36,950.00

PO duly received but not dated

81

96.43%

1,326,158.51

Total

84

100.00%

1,367,116.01

PO with delivery term/period

1

1.19%

135,300.00

PO without delivery term/period

83

98.81%

1,231,816.01

Total

84

100.00%

1,367,116.01

(See Annex L for details)



	6)	Based on the preceding table, 96.43% or 81 vouchers amounting to P1,326,158.51 pertaining to procurements showed that the examined approved contracts or POs were duly acknowledged by the suppliers but the date of receipt thereof was not stated in the PO.  Likewise, 98.81% or 83 POs did not indicate the delivery term/period in the contracts.  Be it noted that these dates are important as reckoning point of the expected date of deliveries.  Not knowing the expected deliveries will hinder the determination of the number of days of delays incurred.



	7)	Accordingly, the Supply Officer must ensure that every PO is duly filled up with all the data needed as a guide for the suppliers in complying with the terms and conditions of the contract.  The delivery term and date of receipt of PO by the suppliers are required to have sufficient basis to demand from them the delivery of goods up to a certain date and to impose liquidated damages or penalty of 1/10 of 1% of the cost of undelivered items per day of delay, in case of the latter’s failure to meet the contract time/period.



	8)	Moreover, the audit disclosed that POs that have no date of acknowledgment of receipt by the suppliers also lacked the necessary date in the Delivery Receipts (DRs) and Inspection and Acceptance Reports (IARs) as evidenced by the examined supporting documents.  The summary of these procurements is shown below:



Lacking Information

No. of Incidents

%

Amount

(per DR and IAR)







DELIVERY RECEIPT

 

 

 

With DRs and duly dated

32

39.51%

630,705.25

Without DRs attached

31

38.27%

430,054.18

With DRs but not dated

18

22.22%

265,399.08

     TOTAL

81

100.00%

1,326,158.51

INSPECTION

 

 

 

Inspected with a date of inspection

43

53.09%

901,995.55

Inspected but no date of inspection indicated

32

39.51%

348,703.46

Not inspected (with attached IAR)

2

2.47%

23,584.50

Not inspected (no attached IAR)

4

4.94%

51,875.00

     TOTAL

81

100.00%

1,326,158.51

ACCEPTANCE

 

 

 

Accepted with a notation indicating partial or complete delivery of procured items

22

27.16%

402,582.05

Accepted but no notation indicating partial or complete delivery of procured items

53

65.43%

829,329.96

Not accepted, no notation (with attached IAR)

2

2.47%

42,371.50

Not accepted, no notation (no attached IAR)

4

4.94%

51,875.00

     TOTAL

81

100.00%

1,326,158.51

        (See Annex M for details)



	9)	The table above showed that 38.27% of deliveries amounting to P430,054.18 have no DRs while 22.22% of deliveries amounting to P265,399.08 were attached with DRs but not duly dated. Without the actual date of deliveries, it is impossible to determine if the goods were promptly delivered or with delays.



	10)	The insufficiencies noted on the DRs would have been compensated by the proper accomplishment of the IARs.  Chapter 10, Section 19 of the GAM for NGAs, Volume I expresses the purpose of IAR as follows: 



“Receipt of items purchased by the agency/entity shall be inspected by the inspection officer/committee before acceptance by the Supply and/or Property Custodian. Acceptance shall be made only if the PPE delivered conform to the standards and specifications in the PO (Appendix 61). Inspection and acceptance shall be made using the IAR (Appendix 62).”



	11)	The IAR is a form used for the inspection and acceptance of purchased and delivered property, supplies and materials. This could have been used in the absence of DRs.  However, even these IARs lacked the necessary information such as the date of the actual receipt of goods, signatures of the Inspector/Supply Officer and the Property Custodian and notation as to the completeness of the delivered items as can be gleaned from the table above.  There were even cases that the IAR form is not attached to the disbursement voucher which casts doubt whether there are actual inspection and acceptance of the purchased goods.



	12)	These deficiencies noted on the POs, DRs, and IAR mean that there is no diligent checking and review of all transaction documents pertaining to these procurements as evidenced by the above-noted issues. The absence of relevant information or documents inhibits the University to impose certain remedies to encourage suppliers to comply faithfully with the conditions and agreements contained in the POs, such as the imposition of liquidated damages to the defaulting suppliers.  The absence of these relevant information or documents conclusively signifies the non-imposition of liquidated damages to its defaulting suppliers.



	13)	We recommended that Management:



a)	impose liquidated damages for the late deliveries pursuant to the abovementioned provisions of the IRR of RA No. 9184 to prevent suppliers from neglecting their responsibility of complying with the conditions of the contract;



b)	require concerned personnel to ensure that the POs, DRs and IARs are properly and completely accomplished to indicate, among others, the delivery period of goods, proper acknowledgment by the suppliers of POs and the date thereof, the actual receipt of goods and the date these are delivered, the completeness of deliveries and the conditions of the goods delivered; 

 

c)	require the Accounting Unit to vigilantly review/evaluate the completeness of the required information on the documents supporting the disbursement vouchers of procurements such as PO, DR, IAR and other relevant documents, and to cease processing payments thereof if insufficiencies or absence of documents are found;



d)	develop and institute measures to address the lapses in the procurement procedure in line with law, rules and regulations; and



e)	collect the computed liquidated damages from the suppliers or deduct from any amount due to them and return the same to the National Treasury.  Otherwise, the computed liquidated damages will be disallowed in audit.



	14)	The Management commented that they will comply religiously with the provision stipulated under Section 3.1 of the Annex “D” of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184.  They assured that any supporting documents arise from the Procurement shall contain substantial information necessary to the processing of payment thereof.

8)	The Management authorized the processing of disbursement vouchers and preparation and release of checks for the payment of various procurements amounting to P435,448.90 even before the actual deliveries by the suppliers, contrary to the process prescribed by the GAM for NGAs.



	1)	One of the procedures before the preparation of certain check for payment to suppliers requires the completeness of all accompanying documents such as Disbursement Vouchers (DVs), Purchase Requests (PRs), Purchase Orders (POs) and other supporting documents such as Delivery Receipts (DRs), Official Receipts (ORs), Inspection and Acceptance Reports (IARs) etc.  It also requires scrutiny and thorough review of these documents by authorized officials of the University.  This is to ensure that no checks were released for irregular and unauthorized transactions.  These internal control mechanisms also prevent the payment of goods and services which the University has not yet received.



	2)	However, scrutiny of supporting documents for procurement transactions revealed that disbursement vouchers with aggregate amount of P435,448.90 were prepared and processed by the Accounting Unit even before the actual delivery of procured items (Annex N).  It is usually prepared 4 to 70 days ahead than the actual date of delivery by the suppliers, without considering whether these suppliers will comply with the agreed terms and conditions stated in the Approved Contracts. This practice of processing disbursement vouchers for payment to suppliers despite the absence of complete supporting documents is a clear deviation of internal control mechanisms integrated to ensure that funds are utilized for actual goods received by the agency. 



	3)	Moreover, based on the inspected documents of Maddela Campus, most of the noted vouchers were paid with the payment term of "Cash on Delivery (COD)" as written in the supporting vouchers.  The COD term requires the University to make the necessary payment at the time of delivery of the procured items.  Hence, this arrangement is a clear manifestation that checks were already prepared and processed even before the ordered goods were delivered.



	4)	It is worth mentioning that previous audit of purchases in other Campuses with the same suppliers revealed that they were accepting payment terms such as 10 to 15 days after the delivery of the goods. This payment scheme can be vouched from the previous Approved Contracts and POs entered by these suppliers and the University Officials.  Hence, the Management cannot contend that these suppliers do not accept payment terms other than COD.



	5)	The Audit Team reminded that while the goods are not yet received by the University, there is uncertainty on the completeness and quality of the items that will be delivered by the suppliers.  There is a greater tendency of receiving substandard and low quality or even incorrect and incomplete items, and in case of breach of contract, the University will be put in a disadvantageous end.  Be it noted that the releasing of checks for payment to suppliers despite the absence of delivery is a clear deviation of internal control mechanisms integrated to ensure the proper use and accountability on government funds.  This practice of the Maddela Campus poses a greater risk to commit employee fraud and misappropriate the funds of the University.



	6)	Continuing this practice would also cause frequent cancellation of checks by the Cashier especially if the goods were not delivered on time or the goods were not delivered at all. In case of delayed deliveries, the possible imposition of liquidated damages would require the replacement of the processed check to reflect the deductions for the amount of liquidated damages from the total claims of the suppliers.  This is tedious on the part of the Cashier who prepares the checks and the Accounting unit who will prepare the adjustments to reflect the true balance of the affected accounts.  There is also a probability that the check will not be replaced and the imposition of liquidated damage will just be forgone.



	7)	But more importantly, this practice is a violation of the existing government accounting rules and regulations which requires the full delivery of goods and completeness of supporting documents before the preparation and processing of checks for payment.  Ultimately, this may result in an imminent loss on the part of the University especially if the suppliers fail to fulfill their obligation of delivering the goods.



	8)	Therefore, the Team reiterated to all authorized signatories of vouchers and checks on the importance of review, verification, and checking of all supporting documents before affixing their signatures thereof. Their signatures and certifications signify that such expenses or payments were correct, appropriate, and legally supported with complete documentary requirements. Thus, no payment shall be made for any kind of procurement without the necessary documents.



	9)	We recommended that the Accounting Unit and the Cashier must refrain from processing disbursement vouchers and preparing and releasing of checks, respectively, of undelivered goods and those with incomplete supporting documents.



	10)	In addition, always ensure that all deliveries are duly inspected, received and acknowledged by the designated personnel before processing the necessary documents and checks for payment to the supplier.



	11)	Lastly, all concerned Offices are advised to carefully review all transaction documents to ensure its propriety, legality and completeness as to documentary requirements before effecting payment. Otherwise, the certifying official/s should be held liable for certifying thereon.



	12)	The Management instructed the Accounting Unit and the Cashier of Maddela Campus to refrain from processing disbursement vouchers and preparing and releasing of checks of undelivered goods and those with incomplete supporting documents.



	13)	Also, the Management assured that all deliveries are duly inspected, received and acknowledged by the designated personnel before processing the necessary documents and checks for payment to the Supplier.



	14)	Moreover, all concerned Offices were advised by the Management to carefully review all transaction documents to ensure its propriety, legality and completeness as to documentary requirements before effecting payment.





9)	Overtime services were rendered on regular basis rather than on circumstances provided by the Civil Services Commission (CSC) and Department of Budget and Management (DBM) Joint Circular No. 02, s. 2015, resulting in the incurrence of unnecessary overtime pay of P88,310.57.



	1)	Policies and guidelines on overtime services and overtime pay for government cited by the CSC and DBM Joint Circular No. 02, s. 2015 prescribes the following general policies on overtime services:



a)	The rendition of overtime services shall be authorized only when extremely necessary, such as when a particular work or activity cannot be completed within the regular work hours and that non-completion of the same will: 



a)   cause financial loss to the government or its instrumentalities; 

b) embarrass the government due to its inability to meet its commitments; or 

c)   negate the purposes for which the work or activity was conceived. 



b)	As a general rule, the remuneration for overtime services shall be through CTO, following the guidelines under the CSC-DBM Joint Circulars No. 2, s. 2004 and No. 2-A. s. 2005. 



c)	The payment in cash of overtime services through Overtime Pay may be authorized only in exceptional cases when the application of CTO for all overtime hours would adversely affect the operations of the agency.  



	2)	The same Circular also prescribes priority activities that may warrant rendition of overtime services as follows:



a)	Implementation of special or priority programs and projects embodied in Presidential directives with specific dates of completion; 

b)	Completion of infrastructure and other projects with set deadlines when due to unforeseen events the deadline cannot be met without resorting to overtime work; 

c)	Essential public services during emergency or critical situations that would require immediate or quick response; 

d)	Relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction, and other work or services during calamities and disasters; 

e)	Seasonal work, such as but not limited to, preparation of budgets and annual reports, in order to meet scheduled deadlines; 

f)	Preparation of financial and accounting reports required by oversight agencies like Congress of the Philippines, Office of the President, Commission on Audit, Department of Budget and Management, and National Economic and Development Authority; 

g)	Services rendered by drivers and other immediate staff of officials when they are required to keep the same working hours as these officials; and 

h)	Such other activities are needed to meet performance targets or deliver services to the public as may be determined by the agency head.



	3)	Certainly, these priority activities must be anchored to the general policy that overtime services are extremely necessary.



	4)	Correspondingly, COA Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012, prescribes the following documentary requirements pertinent to overtime pay:



a)	Overtime authority stating the necessity and urgency of the work and duration of overtime work

b)	Overtime work program

c)	Quantified Overtime accomplishment duly signed by the employee’s supervisor

d)	Certificate of service or duly approved DTR



	5)	Given the above rules and regulations, we have audited the overtime pay of the University.  A perusal of the submitted documents disclosed that for the CY 2020, the University President has allowed overtime services of four (4) administrative personnel of the University to render regular overtime services as can be understood on the issued Memorandum Orders dated January 17, 2020, July 20, 2020, and November 5, 2020, as follows:

Memorandum Order

Sem & SY

Names of Personnel

Services rendered

No. of OT hrs credited during Saturday

January 17, 2020; July 20, 2020; November 5, 2020

2nd Sem SY 2019-2020; 1st Sem SY 2020-2021; 1st sem SY 2020-2021

Baldonado, Melba L.

Library Services

16 hrs/month excess hours rendered will be treated as COC

January 17, 2020; July 20, 2020; November 5, 2020

2nd Sem SY 2019-2020; 1st Sem SY 2020-2021; 1st sem SY 2020-2021

Bunao, Padma R.

Student Admission, Registration, and Records

16 hrs/month excess hours rendered will be treated as COC

July 20, 2020; November 5, 2020

1st Sem SY 2020-2021; 1st sem SY 2020-2021

Domingo, Ma. Rosa B.

Cashiering Services

16 hrs/month excess hours rendered will be treated as COC

January 17, 2020

2nd Sem SY 2019-2020

Luis, Josefina G.

Cashiering Services

16 hrs/month excess hours rendered will be treated as COC



	6)	The Memorandum showed that these administrative personnel are to regularly render overtime every Saturday for 16 hours a month and in excess to be credited as Compensatory Overtime Credit (COC).  The necessity and urgency of the work and duration of overtime work were not clearly indicated but it can be inferred that their services are required to cater to the needs of the graduate students.



	7)	Such regular rendition of overtime is contradictory to the provision of the rules above where it unequivocally stressed that such must only be allowed when extremely necessary.  It must not be forgotten that since the middle of March of 2020, the onset of the pandemic brought about by the CoVid virus has pushed the University to adopt online classes, both for the undergraduate and post-graduate programs, which posits that there were no students or very limited students were able to avail the services of the library, registrar and cashiering services.  This fact militates against the need to render overtime services.



	8)	Notwithstanding the circumstances above, we have perused the accomplishments and other attached documents and found the following deficiencies:



a)	All the claims were not supported by the overtime program.  The overtime program must include the activity/ies or work/s to be conducted, the quantity of work per person, expected time to accomplish the expected output or outcome, persons involved, resources and other relevant information on the incurrence of overtime services.  



b)	Overtime pay amounting to P46,278.58 was not supported with accomplishment reports.  The absence of persuasive supporting documents to show the quantified output for each day of rendition of overtime did not merit the payment of the overtime pay. 

c)	Overtime pay amounting to P42,031.99 was supported with accomplishment reports but these were not quantified and not signed by their immediate Supervisor but by the Dean of Graduate School.  The attached accomplishment report revealed that the activities performed were routine work of the corresponding offices.  It did not show extreme necessity which warrants the rendition of overtime services as cited by the rules above.  Apparently, these may be completed through regular work hours through proper planning and organization of works.  Also, the overtime services were rendered even if classes were administered through online or modular methods because of the pandemic.



d)	Overtime pay amounting to P12,495.36 for April and May 2020 was rendered on a work-from-home scheme by Ms. Padma Bunao.  



Be reminded that the entire Luzon was placed in the strictest form of 	quarantine, Enhanced Community Quarantine (ECQ), for March, April, 	and May 2020.  All personnel are expected to work from home, except 	those who are required to report.  Consequently, the load of work of each 	person was lessened and constrained to those which can only be brought 	home.  For this reason and the fact that faithful rendition of 8-hour work 	during regular days was not also supervised and cannot be entirely 	assured, rendering overtime for administrative function on a work-from-	home basis cannot be given credence.  The absence of quantified 	accomplishment reports attached to her attendance for April and May 	2020 also repudiates her claim for overtime pay.



This is also in violation of the Civil Service Commission Memorandum Circular 10, s. 2020 which unequivocally states that employees under work-from-home are not entitled to Compensatory Overtime Credit/Overtime Pay.



e)	Certificate of service or DTRs were signed by the Dean of Graduate School and not the immediate Supervisor of the concerned personnel.



	9)	Refer to Annex O for detailed information on the observed deficiencies.



	10)	These deficiencies imply that the rendition of administrative overtime services was unnecessary and the lack of some of the documentary requirements makes the claim doubtful and questionable, and are considered disallowable in the audit.



	11)	Furthermore, we have noticed that in the previous years, the cashiering services during Saturdays were rendered by the designated Collecting Officer whose salary is P101.27 per hour.  In contrast, for CY 2020, this was now rendered by the Cashier whose salary is P376.79 per hour.  Had the Collecting Officer rendered the OT cashiering services, which is part of her functions and responsibility being the Collecting Officer, the University could have saved P11,919.14 as computed below:

Name

Position/ Designation

 Hourly Rate 

 OT rate/hr 

 OT hrs 

 OT Cost 

Domingo, Ma. Rosa B.

Cashier

251.19

376.79

53.00

P 19,969.87 

Luis, Josefina G.

Collecting officer

101.27

151.90

53.00

8,050.73 

Difference (Possible Savings)

P 11,919.14 



	12)	The Audit Team reminded further, that basic internal control suggests that collecting and disbursing functions are conflicting functions and must not be lodged in a single person.  The Cashier is acting as Disbursing Officer (DO) of Diffun Campus, hence, collecting function conflicts with her duties as DO.



	13)	The Management must ensure that should there be a need for overtime services, it must take into account the most economical way to achieve the necessary outcome or output it is expected.



	14)	Finally, may we point out that services of these certain offices are not always in demand, or in other words, seasonal.  For example, the need for registrar services often happens during enrollment or before the semester ends while the cashier is often needed before or during examinations as payment of tuition fees is often required.  Though there are times that their services are needed on few occasions, these few instances can be catered during regular working hours.



	15)	The Team cannot overemphasize that overtime work should be avoided by adequate planning of work activities.  Planning must take into consideration all the annual activities of certain offices or departments such as enrollment, accreditations, graduations, celebrations and the like, since these are annual events that are known to happen.  Overtime should not be resorted to in the performance of routine work and activities, except in unforeseen events and emergency situations.  Overtime services entail costs and thus, unwarranted rendition thereof results in wastage of University funds which can be used instead for furtherance of other noteworthy endeavor of the University.



	16)	We recommended that:



a)	the University President must be more circumspect in authorizing the rendition of overtime services and ensure that an appropriate overtime work program is submitted for the approval of overtime services.  He must ascertain that rendition of overtime services shall be authorized only when extremely necessary and when the activities warrant the rendition thereof according to the Joint Circular above;



b)	the Accounting Unit and Cashier ensure that documentary requirements for the overtime pay must be proper and attached to the claims before processing and payment thereof.  Ensure that the accomplishment reports are quantified and support the duration of the overtime rendered;



c)	all concerned personnel to submit the proper overtime work program of the rendered overtime services, Accomplishment Report indicating the quantity of work accomplished per day or an hour and duly signed by their immediate supervisor, and other documents supporting their claims.  Otherwise, these will be disallowed in the audit;



d)	Management stop allowing the Cashier to act as collecting officer every Saturdays so as not to violate the segregation of duties and to ensure that rendition of overtime services are pursued with the most economical method in achieving the outputs or outcome expected; and



e)	Management must ensure that all offices plan their work of activities to avoid the incurrence of overtime services for the performance of routine works and activities, and if circumstances warrant the rendition of overtime services, it must strictly adhere to the provisions of CSC-DBM Joint Circular No. 2, s. 2015 and the documentary requirements prescribed by COA Circular No. 2012-001.



	17)	The Management acknowledged the points raised in the audit finding, however, conveyed the following justifications/comments:



--	The rendition of overtime services of support staff in the graduate school has been construed as necessary to cater to the needs of graduate students and other stakeholders whose time of availment of such services is only on weekends;



--	Management has allowed the rendition of overtime services for the 1st semester of SY 2020-21 because the graduate school department has been originally scheduled to subject three (3) programs of AACCUP accreditation by March 2021.  The documentary requirements necessary in the said activity shall be prepared by these offices under Library, Curriculum and Instruction and Administration areas;



--	Management has permitted the Disbursing Officer of the University to collect tuition and other fees during Saturdays because the Collecting Officer begged off in rendering overtime services. 



	18)	The justifications raised by the Management have already been discussed and generally negated above.  Also, interview with the Collecting Officer showed that she didn’t beg off in rendering overtime services but was asked by the Cashier and is willing to render overtime services whenever she is ordered to.  Therefore, we reiterated the above-audit recommendations and request for Management’s compliance.     



10)	Cash incentives with aggregate amount of P35,000.00 were given to employees involved in the Special Projects of the University, contrary to Item 4(h) of Congress Joint Resolution No. 4 dated June 17, 2009, thus, wanting legal basis.



	1)	Congress Joint Resolution No. 4 dated June 17, 2009, Item 4 (h) thereof, states that:



“Incentives shall be limited to the following:



i)	Incentives to reward an employee’s loyalty to government service and contributions to the agency’s continuing viable existence as follows:



(aa) Loyalty Incentive – This is an incentive to be given in milestone years to reward an employee’s loyalty to government service with at least satisfactory performance. This shall be in lieu of the Loyalty Award; and



(bb) Anniversary Bonus – This is a one-time incentive to be given to employees on the occasion of their agencies’ milestone anniversaries, to recognize the employee’s participative efforts in and contributions to the agencies continuing and/or viable existence;



ii)	Incentives as rewards for exceeding agency financial and operational performance targets, and to motivate employee efforts toward higher productivity, as follows:



(aa) Collective Negotiation Agreement – This may be granted to both management and rank-and-file employees of agencies with approved and successfully implemented CNAs in recognition of their efforts in accomplishing performance targets at lesser cost, in attaining more efficient and viable operations through cost-cutting measures and systems improvement, such CNA incentive shall be provided for under the annual General Appropriations Act; and

(bb) Productivity Enhancement Incentive – This may be authorized by the President of the Philippines for the Executive Branch and LGUs, the Senate President and the Speaker of the House of Representative for the Legislative Branch, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court for the Judicial Branch, the Ombudsman for the Office of the Ombudsman and the Heads of Constitutional Commissions for Constitutional Offices vested with fiscal autonomy at the end of the year. Such productivity enhancement incentive shall be funded from the annual general appropriations.



iii)	Other existing benefits to be categorized by the DBM as incentives.



	2)	Also, Section 4 of Executive Order No. 80, s. 2012 explicitly states that “the grant of allowances, incentives and bonuses other than those authorized under SSL III and any increase in the existing and authorized rates therefore, other than what is provided for in this EO, shall not be allowed.”



	3)	The above resolution expressly limits the incentives that may be granted to employees and proscribes additional incentives other than those mentioned above.



	4)	However, the audit of disbursement vouchers of Maddela Campus revealed that an aggregate amount of P35,000.00 cash incentives were given to Special Project employees as follows:



DV No.

Name of Payee

Particulars

Amount

2019-10-045

Narcisa Aganon

Payment of finder's fee (DA-BAR) project "Commercialization of QSU Maddela Vermicompost in Support to Organic Rice, Coffee and Vegetable Growers in Quirino Province"

 P  15,000.00 

2019-10-044

Narcisa Aganon and Marilyn D. Abad

Payment of finder's fee (DA-BAR) project "Rapid Assessment of Macro and Micronutrients in Soils from Six Municipalities of Quirino Province Towards an Improved Nutrient Management Guideline"

         10,000.00 

2019-10-053

Narcisa Aganon

Payment of finder's fee (DA-RF02) Greenhouse Facility Project

         10,000.00 

 TOTAL

 

 

P  35,000.00 



	5)	Further, audit examination also revealed that only the signed Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) between QSU and the Source Agencies, Approved Request Letter for the grant of cash incentives and a copy of excerpt of the University Research Manual were attached to the disbursement vouchers.  The MOA does not specify any incentives to be given to personnel nor state the grant of rewards in recognition for any research services provided.   An excerpt of the provision of the QSU Research Manual per Board Resolution 05-20 series of 2014 allows granting incentives to employees to motivate researchers to go into research despite heavy academic load, and in recognition of their efforts for sourcing out funds from external funding agency.  Hence, these payments were given in recognition of the collective efforts of the above-noted employees being the primary proponents in sourcing various agricultural-related projects with the Department of Agriculture (DA) as the Source Agency.  This is rewarded to them because they have helped in facilitating the agreement between the Source Agency and the University.  We noted that payment is on a per project basis which simply means that more referred projects will result to more fees and incentives to be received by the employee.



	6)	Relevantly, Executive Order No. 80 dated July 20, 2012 explicitly states the adoption of a Performance-based Incentive (PBI) system for all government employees which also consists of the Productivity Enhancement Incentive (PEI) and the Performance-Based Bonus (PBB).  The establishment of this PBI scheme aligns personnel efforts to the organizational performance to reward exemplary civil servants and well-performing institutions.  Therefore, the claim for incentives by the employees of Special Projects were already incentivized by the grant of performance-based bonus which is a top-up bonus given by the government to personnel of bureaus or delivery units in accordance to the accomplishments of an agency’s overall targets and commitments, such as collective efforts of the concerned personnel for outsourcing funds from outside agencies and engaging into research activities.



	7)	Hence, such incentives already form part of the Performance-based Incentives system of the government as mentioned in the above-stated provision.



	8)	It is also worth mentioning the criteria of giving monetary awards and incentives elucidated in the Civil Service Commission (CSC) Memorandum Circular (MC) No. 1, s. 2001, to wit:



“The PRAISE shall provide both monetary and non-monetary awards and incentives to recognize, acknowledge and reward productive, creative, innovative and ethical behavior of employees through formal and informal mode.



For this purpose, the System shall encourage the grant of non-monetary awards.  Monetary awards shall be granted only when the suggestions, inventions, superior accomplishments and other efforts result in monetary savings which shall not exceed 20% of the savings generated.”



	9)	To bolster these audit findings, we have scrutinized their academic workload which disclosed that during the first semester of the year, one of the recipients were deficient of the required workload units as provided by the Faculty Manual of the University, while during the second semester of the year, both were deficient of the required workload.  This fact must also negate their entitlement of the incentive.



Name

Teaching Load             (In Units)

Designation (Equivalent Unit)

Total Work-Load

Normal Workload Units *     

Overload/ (Under-Load)

Remarks

SY 2020-2021 First Semester

Aganon, Narcisa S.

6

12

18

21

(3 )

Underload

Tolentino, Juanita O.

6

12

18

21

(3 )

Underload

  

SY 2019-2020 Second Semester 

Aganon, Narcisa S.

8

12

20

21

(1 )

Underload

Tolentino, Juanita O.

9

12

21

21

0 

Ok

         *Per Faculty Manual



	10)	Furthermore, despite their deficiency of normal workload, we noted that the abovementioned employees were also receiving monthly honorarium for the same special projects as follows:



Name

Designation

Project

Monthly Honoraria

Total Annual Honoraria

Narcisa Aganon

Project Leader

Commercialization of QSU-Maddela Vermicompost in support to Organic Rice, Coffee and Vegetable growers in Quirino Province

    P  8,800.00 

   P105,600.00 

Narcisa Aganon

Study Leader

Support to Mass Production of Vermicast/Vermicompost in the province of Quirino

    6,000.00 

       72,000.00 

TOTAL

 

 

P 14,800.00 

P177,600.00 



	11)	Be it noted that honorarium is a form of compensation given as a reward for gratuitous services on account of an employee’s broad and superior knowledge or expertise in a specific project.  Such grant of honoraria already compensates the efforts and talents poured upon to the conception and implementation of the special projects.  The grant of incentives to the claimants whose assignments were within their normal workloads is unmeritorious and constitutes unnecessary loss on the part of the government since government funds were disbursed for works or services that were already covered by the salaries and honoraria received by the employees.



	12)	We recommended that Management:



	a)		stop the grant of cash incentives to employees who have source out funds from other agencies because it is not in accordance with existing laws, rules and regulations;

	

	b)		ensure that the grant of incentives to the University’s officials and employees shall be limited to those cited in Item 4(h) of Joint Resolution No. 4, series of 2009; and

	c)		submit legal basis why this should not be disallowed in audit.

	13)	The Management of Maddela Campus commented that they will uphold with the recommendation to discontinue the payment of cash incentives to employees who have sourced out funds from other agencies.  They also mentioned that they will inform the top Management to request the amendment of the Research Manual to align with existing rules and regulations to avoid this transaction in the future.  However, they contended that the payment has been made dutifully in accordance with the provision of the Research Manual and that Congress Joint Resolution No. 04 and EO No. 80 unanimously recognized all employees’ loyalty and untainted services to the government, nonetheless, the concerned employees shall be deprived of this exceptional privilege on their incomparable efforts/skill to reach-out other agencies for the implementation of their discoveries.



	14)	The Audit Team view the Joint Resolution No. 04 and EO No. 80 as the Management does pertaining to incentives, but the kinds of remunerations or incentives for such loyalty and untainted services, among others, were already expressly provided in the said Resolution and Executive Order.  Thus, in addition to such or on top of those already provided which are not anchored on any legal basis, such as the finder’s fee being discussed, is already viewed as excessive and unmerited, warranting disallowance thereof.   

  



11)	Hazard pay disbursed to some of the Cabarroguis employees amounting to P21,500.00 were supported with Daily Time Records (DTRs) with details that did not coincide with the attendance sheet submitted by the Campus Administrator and/or with the logbook maintained by the guards, rendering the claims questionable and disallowable.



	1)		Section 2 of Administrative Order No. 26 dated March 23, 2020 sets the conditions on the grant of the COVID-19 Hazard Pay, as follows:



“a.  The personnel are occupying regular, contractual or casual positions, or are engaged through COS, JO or other similar schemes;



	 b.  The personnel have been authorized to physically report for work at their respective offices or work stations on the prescribed official working hours by the head of agency or office during the period of implementation of Enhanced Community Quarantine measures in the area of such office or work station; and



 c.  The rate of COVID-19 Hazard Pay shall be based on the number of days an employee physically reports for work using the formula under Section 1 hereof.”

	2)	To substantiate these conditions, employees have to present their Office Order to report to work as Skeletal Workforce and evidences of their actual rendition of work or attendance to their offices such as daily time records/attendance sheets and their actual accomplishments of works.



	3)	The University had allowed the payment of P500 per day for a maximum of 5 days to its employees who rendered services during the Enhanced Community Quarantine (ECQ) last March 17 to April 30, 2020.



	4)	In the audit, copies of the Office Orders of the employees to render services as Skeletal Work Force (SKW) were not submitted and attached to the vouchers, and the HR personnel was not also furnished with copy thereof.  The absence of the authority to report or render services is already non-compliance to the above conditions.



	5)	Also, Daily Time Records (DTRs) were attached to the claims but we have noted that the HR Department of the Campus did not require the submission of the DTRs during the quarantine period, hence the DTRs were only prepared as attachment to the hazard pay.



	6)	So, to corroborate the details in the DTRs, we requested the attendance sheet for the period March 17 to April 30, 2020 from the Campus Administrator as the officers alluded that the guards in the main gate were the ones who listed the time-in and out of employees in the attendance sheet as precautionary measure to deter the possible spread of the COVID virus.  The audit thereof disclosed pervasive discrepancies between the DTRs attached to the hazard pay with the attendance sheet submitted by the Campus Administrator.  Nevertheless, the no. of days claimed for hazard pay was still covered except the following:



Name of Payee

Amount claimed 

No of Days Claimed for HP

Days Rendered on DTR

Per Attendance Sheet provided by the CA







M

A

T

M

A

T

Magdalena Guinumtad

1,500.00 

3

7

12

19

0

0

0

Ariel Lagunilla 

3,000.00 

6

2

11

13

0

0

0

Kristine Dela Cruz

3,000.00 

6

2

10.5

12.5

0

0

0

Sonny Boy Marzo

3,500.00 

7

6

15

21

1

1

2

Dennis Ocampo

2,000.00 

4

0

5

5

0

0

0

   Note: M – March     A – April     T – Total



	7)	Further examination of the submitted attendance sheet showed that these were not duly signed by the guards, except for the attendance sheets for March 17, April 21,24,27 and 30, 2020.  Previous attendance sheets were duly signed by at least two guards, but for most of the submitted attendance sheets covering the ECQ period were not signed.  We have also discovered that included in the sheets was an attendance of certain employees for March 17, 2020 which was duly signed by the guard, and one with the same period but not duly signed by the guard, and with conflicting indication of attendees on the said date.  This discovery and the lack of signatures by the guards directed us to lean on the information indicated on the logbook of the guards at the main entrance.  However, even the logbook is found wanting some of the information such as the time-ins or time-outs of some of the employees.  To corroborate the other attendance made by the employees, we have taken into consideration other documents that indicated the attendance or services rendered by some of the employees during the ECQ from March 17 to April 30, 2020 such as the driver’s trip tickets.



	8)	Nevertheless, detailed probe of the entries in the logbook of the guards showed that some employees went to the Campus but stayed less than an hour or two, which were disregarded as valid rendition of service which merited payment of hazard pay.  There were also some entries in the logbook wherein time in or time out were not indicated, and no other corroborating evidences supporting the duration of the rendition of services, making the said claims on the said days doubtful.



	9)	The extensive verification resulted to the discovery of questionable claims due to unverified attendance and/or undetermined duration of attendance amounting to P21,500.00, summarized as follows:



Name of Payee

 Amount claimed 

No of Days paid

 Per Logbook provided by the Guards/Driver's Trip Tickets 

Doubtful Claim







M

A

T

No. of Days

Amount

Magdalena Guinumtad

 P  1,500.00 

3

0

1

1

2

P  1,000.00 

Consuelo Dionio

1,000.00 

2

0

0

0

2

   1,000.00 

Ariel Lagunilla 

3,000.00 

6

0

2

2

4

   2,000.00 

Kristine Dela Cruz

  3,000.00 

6

0

1

1

5

 2,500.00 

Joanne Benavidez

1,500.00 

3

1

1

2

1

      500.00 

Arlyn Rapanut

1,000.00 

2

0

0

0

2

   1,000.00 

Lorrein Dotimas

1,000.00 

2

0

0

0

2

   1,000.00 

Amelito Sabado

3,500.00 

7

0

2

2

5

   2,500.00 

Mario Bustillos

3,500.00 

7

0

5

5

2

   1,000.00 

Romeo Visbal

3,500.00 

7

0

3

3

4

   2,000.00 

Glenn Benavidez

3,500.00 

7

0

6

6

1

      500.00 

Rolando Gonzales

5,000.00 

10

1

2

3

7

   3,500.00 

Sonny Boy Marzo

3,500.00 

7

0

5

5

2

   1,000.00 

Christine Ace Alipio

1,500.00 

3

0

0

0

3

   1,500.00 

Edma Ugot

   500.00 

1

0

0

0

1

      500.00 

Total

P 36,500.00

 









 P21,500.00 

                       (Details are presented in Annex P)	           Note: M – March    A – April      T - Total         



	10)	The Team strongly believed, based on the audit, that some of the documents were fabricated just to support the claims of hazard pay which signify irregularity thereof and casts doubt on the claim, particularly those unsupported by other corroborating evidences.



	11)	Claims which cannot be duly supported with valid documents must not be given credence and considered for payments.  The Management of the Cabarroguis Campus is reminded of their duty as government employees to always uphold the principle of integrity and transparency in the disbursement of government funds to avoid possible disallowances or possible sanctions that may warrant their transgressions.



	12)	We recommended that Management instruct the concerned personnel with unsupported or doubtful rendition of services to submit copies of their office order and evidences of their accomplishments and proof of their attendance during the ECQ for validation by the audit team.  Otherwise, these will be disallowed in audit.



	13)	Moreover, we recommended the investigation on the veracity of the claims of those whose rendition of services was found doubtful, and if these cannot be supported with reliable evidences, require the refund thereof.  Require the responsible officers who possibly committed or allowed the fabrication of the documents and the claims thereof to explain in writing, and if warranted, to impose disciplinary measures.



	14)	The Management said that they investigated this matter and found out that QSU Cabarroguis Campus is amenable that there are lapses in the logbooks because the logbook maintained by the guards are intended for recording the departure and return of the QSU vehicles, visitors and employees who leave the campus during office hours. They also explained that the logbooks used during ECQ were not signed by the guard on duty due to their negligence, thus, they were already reprimanded.



	15)	In addition, the Management will try to provide additional documents to support the claim for hazard pay.



	16)	Lastly, the Management assured to be mindful of the problems noted by the audit to avoid their recurrence.



	17)	The Audit Team acknowledged the response of the Management to the audit finding.  We reminded the Management of Cabarroguis Campus that in the absence of transparent and reliable documents to support any claims, such should not be given credence and processed for payment.  Not only the guards’ logbook which is questionable but also the Attendance Sheets submitted by the Campus Administrator himself.  This Attendance Sheets were the basis of the DTRs attached to the hazard pay claim, but as discussed above, comparison of these two have shown some dissimilar information.  Nevertheless, the Audit Team will thoroughly review the additional documents to be submitted by the Management to determine the veracity of the claims.





12)	Scholarship benefits under the CHED Scholarship Program (CSP) amounting to P3,903,000.00 were granted to students who were not enrolled in priority courses outlined by CHED Memorandum No. 05, s. 2019 dated August 16, 2019 for SY 2019-2020, thereby, defeating the purpose of the program.



	1)	The CSP of the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) aims to provide assistance to deserving and financially-incapable students preferably the underprivileged and homeless citizens under Republic Act No. 7279, persons with disability (PWDs) under RA No. 7277 as amended, solo parents and/or their dependents under RA 8972, Senior Citizens under RA 9994 and Indigenous People under RA 8371 in finishing their tertiary studies.



	2)	Relative to this, the CHED Memorandum Order No. 05, series of 2019 outlines the priority courses for AY 2019-2020 which are aligned with global innovation platforms of Science, Technology, Engineering, Agri-Fisheries and Mathematics (STEAM) as well as the priorities of the government in key growth areas, such as semiconductor and electronics, business processing outsourcing, tourism, general infrastructure and other priority manufacturing industries in the grant of scholarships.



	3)	Data gathered from the Scholarship Coordinators of the different campuses of the University revealed that the amount of P9,386,000.00 were granted to scholars for the AY 2019-2020, as follows:



 Campus

1st Sem

2nd Sem

TOTAL

Diffun

P 1,990,500.00 

  P    637,500.00 

  P 2,628,000.00 

Cabarroguis

 3,188,000.00 

3,200,000.00 

       6,388,000.00 

Maddela

 370,000.00 

 

         370,000.00 

 TOTAL

   P 5,548,500.00 

 P 3,837,500.00 

  P 9,386,000.00 



	4)	Audit examination of the lists of grantees provided by the Scholarship Coordinators disclosed that 282 students who received an aggregate amount of P3,903,000.00 (Annex Q) were not enrolled in priority courses identified by the Memorandum Order above, summarized below:



COURSES

DIFFUN

CABARROGUIS

MADDELA



Qty

1st Sem

2nd Sem

Qty

1st Sem

Qty

1st Sem

Bachelor of Arts Major in English

0

0

0

6

64,000.00

0

0

Bachelor of Early Childhood Education

1

20,000.00

0

0

0

0

0

Bachelor of Elementary Education

34

301,000.00

120,000.00

40

604,000.00

0

0

Bachelor of Midwifery

0

0

0

22

232,000.00

0

0

Bachelor of Secondary Education

33

387,500.00

82,500.00

0

0

9

64,000.00

Bachelor of Technology and Livelihood Education 

15

187,500.00

67,500.00

0

0

14

180,000.00

BS in Business Administration

1

7,500.00

7,500.00

0

0

0

0

BS in Criminology

33

297,500.00

75,000.00

46

808,000.00

0

0

BS in Office Administration

25

255,000.00

97,500.00

0

0

0

0

BS Nutrition and Dietetics

3

22,500.00

22,500.00

0

0

0

0

TOTAL

145

1,478,500.00

472,500.00

114

1,708,000.00

23

244,000.00



	5)	Further scrutiny of the list of the 282 students showed that for the first semester of SY 2019-2020, 14 students were not given the scholarship grants because they were not enrolled or were dropped out from the school, while for the second semester, 219 have not yet received their scholarship, mostly because of the late release of the fund from CHED and few were dropped out or not enrolled.



	6)	The Management explained that not all those included in the master lists of CHED grantees emanated from them.  Some were directly endorsed by politicians or political party lists which did not undergo University’s screening process. In fact, there were incidents where the Scholarship Coordinators have removed some students on the list because they either dropped out or were invalidated due to dual scholarships, but when the master list came, they were still included.  The Management can no longer do anything about the list except to return to CHED during the liquidation of the fund transfer the amount assigned to those who dropped out or were reasonably invalidated.



	7)	We understand the plight of the University because they are just implementing the program based on the list provided by CHED.  However, we suggested that the Scholarship Coordinators should immediately prepare list of students who are enrolled in non-priority courses but were granted of the CSP benefits and inform the CHED about the matter so that the CHED can make the corrections or amend the list, if warranted.



	8)	The very intent of granting these scholarship benefits is to steer or direct students to enroll in public or private Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) offering recognized/authorized undergraduate priority courses which are aligned with global demands and the manpower needs of our nation.  Hence, the scholarship benefits granted to students who were not enrolled in priority courses deprived qualified students who are enrolled in the priority courses, which could have contributed to the achievement of the purpose of the CHED scholarship program and to the national development plans of the government, as well as to meet the current global demands.



	9)	We recommended that the Scholarship Coordinators of the University must inform immediately the CHED upon learning that some grantees included in the master list of their CSP are not enrolled in priority courses outlined under CHED Memorandum No. 5, s. 2019, and coordinate their possible replacements by students who were enrolled in priority courses and were qualified based on the guidelines on the grant of the CSP benefits.



	10)	The Scholarship Coordinators mentioned that CHED screened the grantees and provided them the approved masterlist of Tulong Dunong Program - TES (TDP-TES) including TES which prioritized the poorest of the poor students who belong to the Listahanan. They contended that they only applied students in the portal and eventually validated the forwarded list.



	11)	Nevertheless, the Scholarship Coordinators assured that they will inform the CHED of these findings for their appropriate actions.





13)	Twenty-six (26) disbursement vouchers for the years 2017, 2018, 2019 and 159 vouchers for 2020 amounting to P639,105.26 and P6,946,560.89, respectively, were not submitted as of year-end and the delayed submission of 2020 disbursement vouchers and financial reports continues to persist despite repeatedly reiterating the same observation through the years, contrary to Section 100 of Presidential Decree No. 1445 and Section 7.2.1 (a) of COA Circular 2009-006 dated September 15, 2009, which precluded the Audit Team to render timely audit decisions.



	1)	We have been reiterating the provisions of Section 100 of Presidential Decree No. 1445 which explicitly states that Disbursing Officers in any government agency shall render monthly reports of their transactions pursuant to regulations of the Commission to be submitted not later than the fifth day of the ensuing month to the auditor concerned who shall conduct the necessary examination and audit within thirty days from receipt thereof.

	2)	Also, Section 7.2.1 (a) of COA Circular 2009-006 dated September 15, 2009, prescribing the use of the rules and regulations on the settlement of accounts state that:



“The Chief Accountant, Bookkeeper or other authorized official performing accounting and/or bookkeeping functions of the audited agency shall ensure that:



a)			the reports and supporting documents submitted by the accountable officers are immediately recorded in the books of accounts and submitted to the Auditor within the first ten (10) days of the ensuing month.”



	3)	Further, GAM for NGAs prescribed the following deadlines on submission of financial reports:



 Period

Statement/Report

Deadline

Submit to:

Monthly

Trial Balances, Financial Statements, and Supporting Schedules

Ten days after the end of the month

Auditor, DBM, Management

Quarterly

Trial Balances, Financial Statements, and Supporting Schedules

Ten days after the end of the quarter

Auditor, DBM, Management

Year-end

Trial Balances, Financial Statements, and Supporting Schedules (combined)

February 14 of the following year

Auditor, DBM, Management, COA-GAS



	4)	These guidelines have been communicated to the Management through previous years’ Audit Observation Memorandum (AOM) and Annual Audit Reports (AAR). Despite this, the Accounting Office and the Cashier’s Office, and other concerned officials still failed to observe the above-mentioned prescribed dates of submission of financial reports and transaction vouchers.



	5)	As of this writing, 159 check and payroll vouchers for the CY 2020 amounting to P6,946,560.89 remained unsubmitted to the Office of the Auditor, hence were not subjected to post-audit (Annex R).  



	6)	Also, twenty-six (26) transaction vouchers of previous years amounting to P639,105.56 were yet to be submitted by the Management.  The table below shows the number of unsubmitted vouchers and the total amount involved:



Year

No. of Unsubmitted Vouchers

Amount

2019

6

        P      33,826.08 

2018

7

                 84,061.19 

2017

13

               521,218.29 

TOTAL

26

         P   639,105.56 

(Refer to ANNEX S for details)

	7)	The compositions of these vouchers include payments of GSIS and Pag-IBIG premiums, DBP loan repayments, payment of supplies to PS-DBM, and payments of purchases from various suppliers.



	8)	These vouchers are reportedly missing by the Management due to improper handling and disorganized filing in the Accounting and Cashier Unit.   We have accorded the Management ample time to locate these missing vouchers, thus, failure to submit them together with their complete supporting documents within this year may subject these vouchers to disallowance.    To prevent such, all concerned personnel, particularly the Accountant and the Cashier who are mandated to render accounts of the University and primarily responsible for the submission thereof to the Auditor as enunciated by the law above, must exert extra efforts in locating these documents and to submit them immediately to the Office of the Auditor.



	9)	Also, Monthly and Quarterly Financial Statements and Trial Balances for the following months and quarters were not submitted by the Accounting Office:



DIFFUN CAMPUS

FUND O1

Quarterly Trial Balance and Financial Statement

 December 2020

FUND 05

Monthly Financial Statement

November 2020

 

Monthly Trial Balance

November 2020

 

Quarterly Trial Balance and Financial Statement

 December 2020

FUND 07

Monthly Financial Statement

November 2020

 

Monthly Trial Balance

November 2020

 

Quarterly Trial Balance and Financial Statement

 December 2020

FUND 07DBP

Monthly Financial Statement

November 2020

 

Monthly Trial Balance

November 2020

 

Quarterly Trial Balance and Financial Statement

 December 2020

CABARROGUIS CAMPUS

FUND 05C

Quarterly Trial Balance and Financial Statement

 December 2020

FUND 07C

Quarterly Trial Balance and Financial Statement

 December 2020

MADDELA CAMPUS

FUND 164 STF

Monthly Trial Balance and Financial Statement

February 2020 *, May 2020*, November 2020*,  August 2020

 

Quarterly Trial Balance and Financial Statement

 December 2020

FUND 161 SSP

Monthly Trial Balance and Financial Statement

February 2020 *, May 2020*, November 2020*,  August 2020

 

Quarterly Trial Balance and Financial Statement

 December 2020

FUND IGP

Monthly Trial Balance and Financial Statement

February 2020 *, May 2020*, November 2020*,  August 2020

 

Quarterly Trial Balance and Financial Statement

 December 2020

* only the soft copies of the reports were submitted







	10)	Consequently, the non-submission of disbursement vouchers together with the financial reports precluded the Audit Team from verifying, examining, analyzing promptly the propriety and completeness of transactions, accuracy and integrity of financial reports of the University.  This has been a perennial audit issue that has been raised over the past years but has continued to persist up to now, despite measures adopted by the Management such as increasing manpower in the Accounting and Cashier Unit to handle the voluminous transactions. This is a violation of Section 39(3) of PD 1445 which states that:



	“It shall be the duty of the officials or employees concerned including those in non-government entities under audit, or affected in the audit of government and non-government entities, to comply promptly with these requirements. Failure or refusal to do so without justifiable cause shall constitute a ground for administrative disciplinary action as well as for disallowing permanently a claim under examination, assessing additional levy or government share, or withholding or withdrawing government funding or donations through the government.”



	11)	Therefore, we reminded all the accounting personnel that the Financial Statements are the end-product of an accounting system.  Failure to complete or prepare the said reports may be deemed inadvertence of one of their Office’s functions and responsibilities.



	12)	Likewise, the three (3) campuses failed to submit their Financial Reports and their supporting schedules promptly.  These were submitted late by 2 to 317 days from the prescribed date of submission, to wit:



Diffun Campus

Range of Delay

Fund 01

12 to 109 days

Fund 05

43 to 317 days

Fund 07

43 to 317 days

Fund 07DBP

43 to 317 days

Cabarroguis Campus

 

Fund 05

3 to 220 days

Fund 07

13 to 205 days

Maddela Campus

 

Fund 05   

(STF,SSP&IGP)

2 to 88 days

              (See Annex T for details)

	13)	The delay in submission of these documents and reports adversely affected the timely review post-audit and analysis of the financial transactions of the University, in violation of the intent of Circulars mentioned above. Consequently, the results of the audit were not promptly communicated to the Management.



	14)	The concerned personnel are also reminded of the provisions of Section 127 of PD No. 1445 that repeated unjustified failure to comply with the requirements on submission of transaction vouchers and financial reports constitute neglect of duty and shall be a ground for administrative disciplinary action against the said personnel.



	15)	We reiterated the previous years’ audit recommendations that the Management should require the University Accountant, Cashier, and all other concerned personnel to submit immediately the overdue financial reports, transaction vouchers, and official receipts for proper evaluation of the financial transactions' propriety and validity.  Strict observance of the prescribed submission dates of mandatory reports as required under Section 100 of PD 1445 and Section 7.2.1 (a) of COA Circular No. 2009-006 is highly recommended.



	16)	We recommended further that Management oversee that the Accounting Units perform their main function by producing an organized, complete and accurate financial reports as an end-product of the accounting system, and require the submission thereof to the Office of the Auditor within the deadline prescribed above.



	17)	In addition to the previous years’ recommendations, the Director for Administration and Finance should investigate the possible problems in the Finance Department that hinder the department to submit promptly and completely the required financial reports and transaction vouchers and receipts and to explore and employ other efficient and effective solutions that will end the perennial problem of late submission thereof.  Institute internal policies based on rules and regulations that will facilitate the organized flow of transactions, coordination among the finance Offices, and accountability of each Office, such as the adoption of cut-off dates of transactions, first-in-first-out release of transactions, adoption of routing slip, etc.



	18)	Lastly, we recommended the Accountant and the Cashier to locate the missing vouchers and submit them immediately to the Office of the Auditor, without prejudice to the issuance of the notice of disallowance pursuant to Section 39(3) of PD 1445.



	19)	The Management assured that all the recommendations will be followed in the subsequent transactions.  As to the details of the unsubmitted vouchers and payrolls, the Management commented that:



--	Check and Payroll vouchers for the CY 2020 amounting to P6,946,560.89 were submitted as of March 5, 2021.  Management noted that one (1) voucher was already staled.  The remaining 143 vouchers will be submitted until the end of the first quarter of 2021;



--	Five (5) of the nine (9) unsubmitted vouchers by the Cashier’s Office to the Accounting Unit were already submitted, and will be processed for submission to COA; and



--	Two (2) out of the twenty-six (26) missing vouchers of previous years were already located and to be submitted to the Office of the Auditor. 





14)	Obligations amounting to P10,951,315.63 and P14,588,917.56 pertaining to undelivered goods/unfinished infrastructure projects and unsubstantiated with documentary evidences, respectively, were recognized as Accounts Payables, in contravention to applicable existing rules and regulations.



	1)	Section 119 of PD No. 1445 which prescribes that all lawful expenditures and obligations incurred during the year shall be taken up in the accounts of that year.



	2)	In keeping with the above law, Section 27, Chapter 2 of GAM for NGAs, Volume I, requires that no obligation shall be certified to accounts payable unless the obligation is founded on a valid claim that is properly supported by sufficient evidence and unless there is proper authority for its incurrence.  Any certification for a non-existent or fictitious obligation and/or creditor shall be considered void.



	3)	Further, Section 2, Chapter 6 of the same Manual defines Accounts Payable to be valid and legal obligations of NGAs/Operating Units (OUs), for which, goods/ services/projects have been delivered/rendered/completed and accepted, regardless of the year when these obligations were incurred.



	4)	In case these payables remain unclaimed for a certain period of time, provisions of Executive Order No. 87 dated August 13, 2019 demand that:



“All documented accounts payable for fiscal year 2016 and years prior thereto shall be reverted to the Accumulated Surplus or Deficit of the General Fund, or the Cumulative Result of Operations of the National Government.  Henceforth, all documented account payable which remain outstanding for at least two years, for which no actual administrative or judicial claim has been filed, shall be subject to automatic reversion.”



  All accounts payable which are undocumented or not covered by perfected contracts on record, regardless of the year in which they were incurred, shall automatically be reverted.  The recording of undocumented accounts payable in the books of accounts of agencies shall be strictly prohibited.



	In the event that reverted accounts payable are subsequently validated by competent authorities or by final and executory decisions, the funding therefor shall be determined by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) subject to applicable laws, rules and regulations.”



	5)	These are the governing rules and regulations in recognizing payables at the end of the year.



	6)	For the CY 2020 transactions, we have requested the Management to present disbursement vouchers and other supporting documents of their accounts payable for audit examination.  The examination of the submitted documents divulged the following audit findings:



a)	The amount of P10,951,315.63 pertains to contracts with undelivered goods or infrastructure enumerated in Annex U. The recording of obligations which are not yet due and demandable because of non-delivery of goods or non-performance of services is strongly discouraged and prohibited by the rules above.  Such act is also against the generally accepted accounting principle of accrual.  In effect, the recording thereof resulted in the overstatement of the Accounts Payable account and the related inventories and PPE accounts;



b)	Careful inspection of the those with undelivered goods showed that procurement to non-bona fide suppliers (as discussed in Finding No. 6) were still allowed, despite the knowledge thereof by the Procurement Office, as follows:



Date

Supplier

Particulars

Amount

12/29/2020

KM 334 Enterprises and Concrete Products

Payment of the project: Supply and Delivery of Supplies and Materials of revolving stool & formica table K18A-2020 05D Res

P 24,750.00 

12/29/2020

KM 334 Enterprises and Concrete Products

Payment of the project: Supply and Delivery of Office Supplies 07D(VERMI) K09-2020

   7,249.00 

12/29/2020

KM 334 Enterprises and Concrete Products

Payment of the project: Supply and Delivery of Janitorial Supplies 07D(VERMI) K11A-2020

 18,058.00 

12/29/2020

KM334 Enterprises and Concrete Products

Payment of the project: Supply and Delivery of Printer for 07D (DA-MUSHROOM) L09-2020

 14,980.00 

TOTAL





 P 65,037.00



It must be remembered that on December 17, 2020, the COA Office together with the Procurement Office and Accounting Unit conducted a joint validation of suppliers and the above supplier was found out to have no legitimate and currently opened physical store to operate, thus, considered a non-bona fide supplier.  As a result of validation, existing contracts should have been cancelled since transactions to them may be construed as irregular.



c)		The amount of P415,095.49 pertains to Inter-Agency Payables such as Agency share to Employees’ Contribution to GSIS, PhilHealth and Pag-IBIG (Annex V).  Appropriate accounts for the recognition of these kinds of liabilities were already provided by the GAM like the Due to GSIS/Pag-IBIG/PhilHealth.  Thus, instead of using the Accounts Payable Account to record their incurrence, the preferred accounts are more fitting and proper. 

	

d)		The amount of P14,588,917.56 recognized as Accounts Payable were not presented for examination due to absence of documents and/or the documents were still being prepared for processing (Annex W).  The List consisted of claims for salary differentials, wages and other employee’s benefits, purchases of goods and services, and procurement of infrastructure projects.  Because these were devoid of documentary evidence, we have not corroborated their appropriateness as to legality, existence, correctness and completeness, rendering their recognition questionable.  We were not also able to confirm the validity of the claimants. May we emphasize that the rules above absolutely proscribe the recognition of undocumented payables or those wanting valid claims or contracts.

	

e)		Included among those undocumented Accounts Payables are the payables which have remained outstanding for more than two (2) years aggregating P8,820,197.21, enumerated below: 

	 

Fund

Name Of Creditor

Amount

Aging







Over

Over 3 years







2 years

and onwards

01

NTL Builders and Developer

1,951,676.66 

 

1,951,676.66 

01

NTL Builders and Developer

 1,485,000.00 

  1,485,000.00 

 

01

NTL Builders and Developer

 1,454,172.13 

 1,454,172.13 

 

01

Alfalfa Construction

3,882,466.00 

 3,882,466.00 

 

05-STF

Hector S. Caluya

        1,280.00 

         1,280.00 

 

05-STF

Eloisa Valino

            190.00 

            190.00 

 

05-STF

QUIRELCO

         5,444.12 

         5,444.12 

 

05-STF

Corazon P. Ladia

        8,600.00 

        8,600.00 

 

05-STF

Lemilyn Mauricio

        1,500.00 

        1,500.00 

 

05-STF

Buildwise Hardware

       4,689.55 

         4,689.55 

 

05-SSP

Bank Recon For Nov. 2016

   10,885.00 

 

    10,885.00 

05-SSP

Rey P. Anggaban, Jr.

         2,000.00 

 

     2,000.00 

05-SSP

Junipen Pescador

            500.00 

 

        500.00 

05-SSP

QUIRELCO

       10,293.75 

 

  10,293.75 

05-SSP

Rudy Pavico, Jr.

        1,500.00 

 

   1,500.00 

TOTAL

 

8,820,197.21 

6,843,341.80 

1,976,855.41 



The applicable rule requires that these must be reverted to Accumulated Surplus or Deficit of the General Fund, or the Cumulative Result of Operations of the National Government in the absence of administrative or judicial claim.  The existence of long outstanding Accounts Payable in the Books of Accounts of agencies unnecessarily immobilizes public funds. 

 

	7)	The Accountants contended that the recognition of Accounts Payable for undelivered goods and even portion of unfinished projects was to reconcile with the obligations recognized by the Budget Office. However, the categories of these obligations fall under “not yet due and demandable obligations” which only needs disclosure in the Financial Statements as stated in the Accounting Circular Letter No. 2007-001 dated January 19, 2007, to wit:



“The Budget Officer/Head of Budget Unit shall also submit a List of Not Yet Due and Demandable Obligations (Annex A). Such obligations which are not yet recorded as liabilities are agencies' valid commitments based on approved contracts/purchase orders where projects are not yet implemented and/Cr goods are not yet delivered. The same shall be disclosed in the Notes to Financial Statements.”



	8)	The recognition of a liability is not dependent to the obligations recognized by the Budget Office. A liability, such as Accounts Payable, must only be recognized if the University has an obligation arising from past events, the settlement of which is expected to result in an outflow from the entity of resources embodying economic benefits or service potential, such as receipt of goods, infrastructure or services.



	9)	With the undocumented payables, we attribute the absence of the documents of some of the Accounts Payables due to accommodation of expenditures despite the lapsing of the given period to recognize those chargeable to budget.  Late procurements were initiated and facilitated to utilize the unused balances of funds, particularly the General Fund, to avoid reversion thereof to the National Treasury.  The processing of these is hastened and most often than not, it results to the derailment of the internal control mechanisms which ensures transparency, legality and propriety of the claims.  In this instance, the practice led to the recognition of payables even if the transactions are devoid of documentary evidences.



	10)	Furthermore, accommodating transactions without documentary evidences also opens opportunity for possible commission of fraud such as charging fictitious claims and falsification of documents. The existence of invalid Accounts Payable in the Books of Accounts of agencies hampers efforts to determine the actual financial condition of the national government and hinders effective resource planning and allocation since actual funds are allotted for their payment.   Therefore, only valid and duly supported with appropriate evidences must be recognized as accounts payable by the University.



	11)	We recommended that:



a)	the Accountants of the different Campuses stop recognizing Accounts Payables in their respective books based on the obligations recognized by the Budget Offices, particularly those transactions where goods are yet to be delivered or services yet to be rendered, but rather disclose these in the Notes to Financial Statements.  The Accountants are advised to make the necessary adjusting entries to reflect the correct balances of the Accounts Payable and the affected accounts; 



b)	the Accountants and the Budget Offices revert the long outstanding payables with no actual administrative or judicial claims to Accumulated Surplus or Deficit of the General Fund, or the Cumulative Result of Operations of the National Government, in accordance with the Executive Order No. 87 dated August 13, 2019;



c)	the Accountants reclassify the Inter-Agency Payables to more appropriate accounts provided by the GAM;



d)	the Budget Offices and the Accounting Units set up deadlines or cut-off dates for the submission of claims to prevent accommodations of unduly supported obligations or those wanting contracts to be recognized as liabilities to avoid accumulation of invalid accounts payable or deter the commission of fraud through fictitious claims or falsification of documents;



e)	the Procurement Officer to explain why there were still procurement made to a known non-bona fide Supplier, and why the contracts should not be cancelled; and



f)	ensure that the Finance Department must strictly observe the governing rules and regulations on the recognition and proper accounting of payables.



	12)	The Management mentioned that the Accountants of Diffun Campus had already taken up the adjusting entries to reflect the balances of the Accounts Payable and the Accountant of Maddela Campus was also instructed to do the same.



	13)	The Management assured that the Finance Department will strictly observe the governing rules and regulations on the recognition and proper accounting of payables.





15)	Construction in Progress (CIP) amounting to P274,144,873.06 remained overstated by P263,572,197.59 due to Management’s non-reclassification of completed projects to the corresponding asset accounts, resulting in non-recognition of their corresponding previous and current year’s depreciation expenses, contrary to Chapter 10 Section 8(g), GAM Volume III.



	1)	Chapter 10 Section 8 (g) Volume I of the same Manual further states that:



“During construction period, all expenses incurred in relation to the construction of PPE shall be taken up in the books as Construction in Progress (CIP) with appropriate asset classification.  As soon as the construction is completed, the “CIP” account shall be reclassified to the proper asset account.”



	2)	Further, Section 43 of Philippine Public Sector Accounting Standards (PPSAS) No. 17, Volume II, provides the following rule on the depreciable assets:



“After recognition of an asset, an item of PPE shall be carried at its cost, less any accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses.”



	3)	Review of the Financial Statements revealed that the account CIP amounted to P274,144,873.06, broken down as follows:



CIP-Land Improvements

 P            328,118.59 

CIP-Infrastructure Assets

         12,371,226.13

CIP-Buildings and Other Structures

        261,445,528.34 

TOTAL

 P     274,144,873.06 

	4)	CIP appearing in the Financial Statements should be composed of those projects that are not yet completed as of year-end.  With our very own physical inventory and with the aid of the Quarterly Report on Government Projects/Activities/Projects (PAPs) as at December 31, 2020 submitted by the Director of Physical Plant Site and Development Office, the on-going projects were determined as follows:



Projects

% of Completion

Cost Incurred to Date

Improvement of Old CHIM Building (Maddela Campus)

80.36%

   P   2,537,929.91 

Improvement of Old CHIM Building (Maddela Campus) - Adjacent Contract

49.60%

      169,254.81 

Construction of Women's Dormitory (Cabarroguis Campus)

43.56%

3,164,420.92 

Underground Electrical System Phase I

94.74%

   3,879,280.11 

Underground Electrical System Phase I (Cabarroguis Campus) - Adjacent Contract

68.14%

      821,789.72 

TOTAL

 

 P 10,572,675.47 



	5)	Comparatively, the CIP balances presented in the Financial Statements as of year-end is overstated by P263,572,197.59.



	6)	In the audit, we have determined that during the year, the following projects were reported completed by the Management:



Project

Location

Target Completion Date

Total Cost Incurred

Improvement of Administration Building

Maddela Campus

07/06/2020

 P 4,824,504.92

Construction of Seventy Spans concrete Fence

Diffun Campus

10/27/2020

901,532.22

Construction of Seventy Spans concrete Fence (Adjacent Contract)

Diffun Campus

11/9/2020

499,885.31

Improvement of Administration Building (JAA Hall)

Diffun Campus

11/04/2020

3,188,284.06

Improvement of Administration Building (JAA Hall)

Diffun Campus

10/22/2020

911,715.88

Improvement of Agriculture Building

Diffun Campus

09/07/2020

3,061,379.18

Improvement of Agriculture Building - Adjacent Contract

Diffun Campus

10/16/2020

628,620.82

Improvement of Farm Mechanics Building

Diffun Campus

10/29/2020

2,765,570.07

Improvement of Farm Mechanics Building - Adjacent Contract

Diffun Campus

10/13/2020

334,429.07

Improvement of Gymnasium

Maddela Campus

10/29/2020

3,620,991.24

Improvement of Gymnasium - Adjacent contract

Maddela Campus

09/22/2020

229,008.76

Upgrading of Banana Tissue Nursery

Diffun Campus

10/25/2020

1,639,335.33

Upgrading of Banana Tissue Nursery (Lucky A)

Diffun Campus

10/26/2020

755,443.20

TOTAL

 

 

P 23,360,700.06

	7)	Despite the completion of these buildings, only the following items were reclassified to their appropriate PPE accounts:



Building

Amount

Account Title

Improvement of JAAH Building

P   4,099,999.94 

Building

Improvement of Agriculture Building

     3,690,000.00 

School Building

Total 

P   7,789,999.94 

 



	8)	Consequently, the non-reclassification of the completed projects to their respective accounts affected the fair presentation of the Financial Statements, as follows:



a)	Construction in Progress account was overstated;

b)	Current and previous years’ depreciation expenses were not recognized for the completed projects in the previous years and for those completed in 2020, thereby, understating the current expenses and overstating the current income, and overstating the Accumulated Surplus/Deficit account; and

c)	Valuations of the related completed buildings were also erroneously presented since the related accumulated depreciations were not considered.



	9)	We recommended that the Accountant must determine those completed projects which are still lodged in the Construction in Progress account, and reclassify them to their appropriate accounts for proper and fair presentation of the Financial Statements. Thereafter, compute the appropriate book values of each completed projects and make the necessary adjusting entries to correct valuation of the Property, Plant and Equipment accounts affected by the reclassification made and to recognize the depreciation expense for the CY 2020.



	10)	Hereafter, we recommended that the Accounting Unit must closely coordinate with the Physical Plant and Site Development Office to determine the completed projects regularly, so that these will be recognized, and the reclassification thereof to their appropriate accounts as well as their corresponding depreciations are taken up in the books of the University. 



	11)	The Management instructed the Accountant to determine those completed projects which are still lodged in the Construction in Progress account and reclassify them to their appropriate accounts for proper and fair presentation of the Financial Statements. In addition, the Accounting Office assured that necessary adjusting entries will be made within the year.





16)	The Accounting Unit failed to provide for Depreciation Expenses on related depreciable assets of the University, thereby, overstating the Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) account, with aggregate total cost of P117,522,907.27 and understating the expenses of the University, contrary to Section 27(c), Chapter 10 of GAM for NGAs, Volume I.



	1)	Section 27(c), Chapter 10 of GAM Volume I states that:



		“Depreciation of an asset begins when it is available for use such as when it is in the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management.  For simplicity and to avoid proportionate computation, depreciation shall be for one month if the PPE is available for use on or before the 15th of the month.  However, if the PPE is available for use after the 15th of the month, depreciation shall be for the succeeding month.” 

		

	2)	In addition, the provisions of Section 27(f) and (g) of the GAM further states that:



“f.  The estimation of the useful life of the asset is a matter of judgment based on the experience of the entity with similar assets. The agency/entity is in the best position to estimate the expected useful life of its PPE. As a guideline, PPE shall be depreciated over the following life spans:



Property, Plant and Equipment

Estimated Useful Life



Land Improvements

Over the useful life of the asset to which the improvement was made or the useful life of the improvement if significantly shorter



Infrastructure Assets

20 to 50 years



Buildings and Other Structures

30 to 50 years



Machinery and Equipment

5 to 15 years



Transportation Equipment:

 



     Motor vehicles

5 to 15 years



     Motor vehicles (Military 

        vehicles)

3 to 20 years



     Trains

10 to 20 years



     Aircrafts and Aircrafts Ground 

        Equipment

10 to 20 years



     Watercrafts

10 to 25 years



Furniture, Fixtures and Books

2 to 15 years



Leased Assets, excluding Land

Over the useful life of the leased asset or the lease term, whichever is shorter. The lease term would include any renewal option periods where extension of the lease is expected.



Leased Assets Improvements

Over the useful life of the improvement or the lease term, whichever is shorter. The lease term would include any renewal option periods where extension of the lease is expected.



Service Concession Assets

Over the useful life of the service concession asset or the term of the service concession arrangement, whichever is shorter. The term of the service concession arrangement would include any renewal option periods where extension of the service concession arrangement is expected.



Other Property, Plant and Equipment

2 to 15 years





a)	Based on the above life spans, the entity shall prepare the specific estimated useful life for each asset based on its experience on the life of its PPE, copy furnished the Resident Auditor and the Government Accountancy Sector of COA.”



	3)	However, examination of the submitted Financial Statements of the University revealed that the Accounting Unit failed to provide for depreciation of certain assets for the year 2020 as shown in the succeeding table:



Property, Plant and Equipment

Diffun

Cabarroguis

Total

Machinery and Equipment

 

 

 

     Machinery

P              0.00   

  P  64,260.00 

  P     64,260.00 

     Communication Equipment

       4,000.00 

                 0.00   

          4,000.00 

     Disaster Response and Rescue 

           Equipment

       75,900.00 

                 0.00   

       75,900.00 

     Medical Equipment

1,977,386.90 

                 0.00   

   1,977,386.90 

     Sports Equipment

                0.00   

     76,600.00 

        76,600.00 

     Other Machinery and 

             Equipment

2,678,974.80 

                 0.00   

   2,678,974.80 

Transportation Equipment

 

 

 

     Watercrafts

     22,260.00 

                 0.00   

        22,260.00 

     Other Transportation Equipment

   75,714.28 

0.00   

        75,714.28 

Furniture and Fixture

 

 

 

     Books

                0.00   

   463,457.50 

      463,457.50 

TOTAL

P4,834,235.98 

   P604,317.50 

  P5,438,553.48 



	4)	Inquiry with the Accounting Unit disclosed that they were not able to compute for the depreciation since the PPE reported in the book of accounts were in lump-sum. The absence of PPE ledger accounts caused the difficulty in itemizing the components of each account, resulting to the failure of the Accounting Unit to record the corresponding depreciation expense.



	5)	However, the Audit Team even noted that those currently and previously completed buildings and other infrastructures located in Diffun and Cabarroguis Campuses were not also provided with depreciation, to wit:

Year Completed

Total Cost Reclassified 

Total Salvage Value

Depreciable Cost

Should-be Depreciation Expense Recognized

2016

P  38,113,663.15 

P 1,905,683.16 

P   36,207,979.99 

P 1,206,932.67 

2017

    66,180,690.70 

   3,309,034.54 

  62,871,656.17 

     2,095,721.87 

2020

      7,789,999.94 

      389,500.00 

    7,400,499.94 

          41,113.89 

TOTAL

P 112,084,353.79 

P 5,604,217.69 

P 106,480,136.10 

  P 3,343,768.43 

     (See details in ANNEX X)



	6)	The two (2) completed buildings in 2020 were previously recorded as Construction in Progress which were reclassified to corresponding Buildings and Other Structures accounts but there is no depreciation expense recognized after its reclassification. While the 2016 and 2017 completed projects were previously reported in our Annual Audit Report as undepreciated assets, but still the Accounting Unit failed to recognized depreciation for the current year.



	7)	The Audit Team reminded the Accounting unit that, since data for the computation of depreciation were readily available, they should have provided the depreciation expense for 2020 amounting to P3,343,768.43, assuming that estimated life of newly completed buildings is 30 years.



	8)	Furthermore, it is reiterated to the Management that non-provision of depreciation will not report the correct net book value of a given asset. This would overstate the value of the asset and understate the expenses for the period which can lead to misleading financial information. Be it noted that the Property, Plant and Equipment comprised 80.86% of the total assets of the University.  Hence, erroneous valuation and reporting thereof would greatly impact the reliability and credibility of the Financial Statements as a whole.



	9)	We recommended that the Accounting Unit:



a)	prepare the specific estimated useful life for each depreciable asset based on Management’s experience on the life of its PPE, copy furnished the Resident Auditor and the Government Accountancy Sector of COA based on the experience of the entity with similar assets and the corresponding lifespan provided by the GAM; and



b)	provide depreciation expenses based on the guidelines provided in Section 27(c) Chapter 10 of GAM Volume I to present fairly the correct valuation of the PPE, particularly for depreciable assets purchased from current year and recent years which can be easily traced, and to provide depreciation for the succeeding purchases of PPE.



	10)	The Accounting Office commented that they will provide the corresponding Depreciation Expense for all the Identified Assets of the University.





17)	Valuation of the biological assets amounting to P2,469,695.06 was overstated by P1,981,830.66 due to noncompliance of the prescribed valuation thereof, cited in Philippine Public Sector Accounting Standards 27 and COA Circular No. 84-239 dated August 15, 1984.



	1)	Philippines Public Sector Accounting Standards defines biological assets as a living animal or plant, while agricultural produce is the harvested product of the entity’s biological assets.



	2)	Biological asset shall be measured on initial recognition and at each reporting date at its fair value less costs to sell, while agricultural produce harvested from an entity’s biological assets shall be measured at its fair value less costs to sell at the point of harvest.  Particularly, the standards state the basis of fair value to which the animal stocks of the University may be applied, as follows:



“If an active market exists for biological asset or agricultural produce in its present location and condition, the quoted price in that market is the appropriate basis for determining the fair value of that asset.  If the entity has access to different markets, the entity uses the most relevant one.  For example, if an entity has access to two active markets, it would use the price existing in the market expected to be used.”



	3)	Parallel to this, COA Circular No. 84-239 dated August 15, 1984 outlines the proper reporting of animal products acquired and produced, as follows:

	“1.6. xxx.  In the absence of such industry standards, each agency head shall constitute an Appraisal Committee to develop a cost system for each variety or specie of animal on the basis of prevailing market prices.

		1.7. Upon reaching marketable or maturity age and once their purpose has been determined, the offsprings of animals shall be transferred to appropriate accounts.

			1.8. Animals which perish or are issued for institutional use or consumption, shall be supported by a properly approved Requisition and Issue Voucher (RIV) and dropped from the inventory account.  In case of loss, a request from relief from accountability shall be made.  Loss due to the negligence of the accountable officer concerned, shall be chargeable against him and the amount to be refunded shall be based on the prevailing market value determined by an Appraisal Committee created by the Agency Head concerned.

		

	…xxx…

	1.12. Large animals should be appraised quarterly and/or at the time of disposal.  A report on the appraised/ standard cost determined shall be submitted by the Appraisal Committee of the Agency Head. Copy furnished Property Officer.  The Chief Accountant shall prepare journal voucher to adjust the inventory/investment/fixed asset account for livestock to its appraised value.  The property officer shall likewise update the property ledger card based on the appraisal/standard cost report.

	….xxx…

	1.14. In the case of death of offspring, the project manager shall likewise submit a report to the Agency Head within 2 days.  The report shall also state the value of the animal stating therein, causes/reasons of death and other necessary details.  The report shall also be accomplished in five (5) copies to be distributed as follows:

	

				Original	-	Agency Head

			 	Copy 1		-	Accounting

				Copy 2		-	Property Officer

				Copy 3		-	Cashier

				Copy 4		-	File of Project Manager 	”



	4)	Biological assets presented in the Financial Statements totaled P2,469,695.06, broken down as follows:



Account Title

Amount

Breeding Stocks

 P 1,839,710.16 

Livestock

       629,984.90 

TOTAL

 P 2,469,695.06 



	5)	This account has been non-moving for several years, denoting that increases in value brought by physical change and changes in prices, as well as decreases due to death or sales, were not accounted for in the books.  Apparently, these are still measured on its initial cost, and no proper appraisal was made on each class or kind due to absence of gathered information on applicable fair values thereof.



	6)	Section 11 of GAM for NGAs instructs that the caretaker or responsible person regularly gather data on current fair value of the biological assets and post it in the respective individual Biological Assets Property Card (BAPC).  These are essential tools for proper accounting and valuation of the said assets.



	7)	Nevertheless, physical inventory was conducted and it was determined therein that biological assets have an estimated value of P487,864.40, thereby overstating the account by P1,981,830.66.





Qty

Est. FMV

Total

Amount Recorded

Overstatement

 DIFFUN CAMPUS

Buffalo











Caracow

5

30,000.00 

P 150,000.00 

 

 

Yearling (M)

3

 15,000.00 

   45,000.00 



 

Yearling (F)

5

 15,000.00 

   75,000.00 

 

 

Calf (M)

1

   8,000.00 

     8,000.00 

 

 

Calf (F)

2

   8,000.00 

   16,000.00 

 

 

Sheep

 

 

 

 

 

Wether

1

   4,666.00 

     4,666.00 

 

 

Ewe

1

   5,200.00 

     5,200.00 

 

 

Goat

 

 

 

 

 

Doe

4

   3,999.60 

   15,998.40 

 

 

Subtotal

 

 

P 319,864.40 

P 2,096,695.06 

P  1,776,830.66 

MADDELA CAMPUS 

Carabao

 

 

 

 

 

Bullock

2

 28,000.00 

   56,000.00 

 

 

Sire/Dam

5

 20,000.00 

 100,000.00 

 

 

Calving

1

 12,000.00 

   12,000.00 

 

 

Subtotal

 

 

P 168,000.00 

P    373,000.00 

P     205,000.00 

TOTAL

 

 

P 487,864.40 

P 2,469,695.06 

P  1,981,830.66 



	8)	Likewise, gains or losses due to physical or price changes were not recognized during the year due to failure of the caretakers’ or project managers’ preparation of the Quarterly Report of Biological Assets (QRBA) containing, among others, the balances at the beginning of the quarter and the changes in fair value of the biological assets due to growth, degeneration, production, and procreation as prescribed by the GAM.



	9)	There were also other biological assets which were not recognized by the University, such as those used in the research activities like Banana and Mushroom projects.  It is known that propagated items were also sold, thereby resulting to incidental income which was recognized by the University.  Thus, such source of inflow of benefits must be recognized as assets, and the corresponding cost of sale must also be recognized to match the income earned.



	10)	The improper valuation of these assets, as well as the non-recognition of gains or losses due to death, consumption, production or growth of these assets reduces the reliability of the information presented in the Financial Statements.



	11)	We recommended that:

	

a)	Management form an Appraisal Committee to determine the fair values of each kind and each classification of the animal stock for proper valuation, in accordance with PPSAS;



b)	The Project Managers/Projects-In-Charge/Caretakers maintain complete and accurate logbooks, and submit the required quarterly and annual inventory reports to the Accountant, Supply Officer and the Auditor to facilitate the proper valuation and recording of birth/production, sale and mortality of animal stock of the University, in consonance with COA Circular 84-239 and GAM; 



c)	the Accounting Unit adopt and implement the rules and guidelines in the proper costing of the Biological Assets of the University to ascertain the correctness in the presentation and reporting of the Biological Assets account.  Adjust the corresponding Biological Asset accounts to present the correct balance thereof and to maintain ledger cards for the same; and



d)	Management identify all biological assets maintained by the University and make proper valuation thereof, and require project in-charge to prepare the necessary inventory reports.



	12)	The Management reconstituted the Appraisal Committee to determine the fair values of each kind and each classification of the animal stocks.



	13)	Also, the Management replied that the Project Managers/Projects-In-Charge/Caretakers already submitted the required quarterly and annual inventory reports to the Accountant for year 2020. Further, the Management instructed them to submit the same for the succeeding period to facilitate the proper valuation and recording of birth/production, sale and mortality of animal stock of the University.



	14)	Moreover, the Management is on the process of identifying all the biological assets of the University.





18)	Accounts Receivable, Interest Receivable, and Loans Receivable - Others accounts aggregating to P5,662,543.87 remained undetermined and/or uncollected for at least 10 years, thus rendering the accounts’ probability of collection uncertain and the balances of the accounts unreliable.

	1)	Section 111 of Presidential Decree (PD) 1445 stresses the importance of keeping of accounts, to wit:



	“(1)  The accounts of an agency shall be kept in such detail as is necessary to meet the needs of the agency and at the same time be adequate to furnish the information needed by fiscal or control agencies of the government.



(2)  The highest standards of honesty, objectivity, and consistency shall be observed in the keeping of accounts to safeguard against inaccurate or misleading information.”



	2)	It is the fundamental responsibility of the Accounting Unit to secure, prepare and maintain, and update records of transactions to facilitate easy retrieval of information and the correct information be reported.



	3)	The Accounting Unit submitted their Status of Unliquidated Cash Advances, Fund Transfers and Other Receivables as at December 31, 2020.  Evaluation of this report, particularly on the status of other receivables, revealed that balances amounting to P828,412.58 (Annex Y) which were undetermined, broken down as follows:



Account Title



Amount

Accounts Receivable

P

1.01

Interest Receivable



(12,557.34)

Loans Receivable



847,478.83

Other Receivables



(6,509.92)

TOTAL

P

828,412.58



	4)	These pertain to previous years’ transactions where records such as ledgers or other pertinent documents such as contracts of agreement are not kept intact in an organized manner and their locations unknown.  Due to the absence of references, these were tagged as undetermined in the report.  The documents wouldn’t have been lost if the complete documentation of the transactions has been kept intact after its consummation.  Consequently, collection of these receivables is nil since there is no specific person/s to demand payments therefrom, and thus, renders the validity of the undetermined receivables doubtful.



	5)	Also, examination of Status of Unliquidated Cash Advances, Fund Transfers and Other Receivables of Maddela Campus revealed that the cash advance of Mr. Christopher Allan Saquing, Supply Officer, dated November 18, 2020 amounting to P48,000.00 for the repair of dump truck, remained unliquidated as at December 31, 2020. However, the audit team noted that it was no longer included as Advances to Officers and Employees in the 2020 Financial Statements of the Campus. Our inquiry with the Accounting Unit disclosed that the cash advance was liquidated on January 16, 2021 only.  This cast doubts on the reliability of the reflected balance of the said account in the Financial Statements.



	6)	Further, the aging of the Loans and Receivables showed that balances amounting to P4,834,131.29 (Annex Z) remained uncollected for ten years or more.  This is broken down as follows:



Account Title



Amount

Accounts Receivable

P

4,240,847.87 

Interest Receivable



   313,529.83 

Other Receivables



   279,753.59 

TOTAL

P

4,834,131.29 



	7)	This amount pertains to 1,465 accounts of Diffun Campus only.  Cabarroguis Campus does not have accounts aging 10 years and above while the accounts of Maddela Campus cannot be aged due to non-provision of the date granted by the Campus Accountant in the report.



	8)	The non-collection of accounts for long periods renders their collectability uncertain, thus, adversely affecting the reliability of the balances presented in the financial reports. These accounts are already considered as dormant accounts which are defined by COA Circular No. 2016-005 as accounts whose balances remained inactive or non-moving in the books of accounts for ten (10) years or more and where settlement or collectability could no longer be ascertained.  These may now be subjected to write-off.



	9)	Analysis of the same report also disclosed the following:



a)	Previously recorded cash advance of Ms. Krystal Mae M. Cabe amounting to P10,410.00 for traveling expenses which remained outstanding as of year-end was reclassified and reported as Accounts Receivable.  The same was noted in Maddela Campus wherein the cash advances of Ms. Cabe with aggregate amount of P74,328.80 remained unliquidated broken down as follows: 



Fund

Particulars

Amount

SSP

Cash advance for Petty Cash Fund of Mr. Agduyeng

 P  25,364.00 

SSP

Cash advance for training

      10,000.00 

STF

Balance  - items not found during inspection

      38,964.80 



TOTAL

P 74,328.80



The noted advances were reported under Other Receivables – Due from Officers and Employees instead of Advances to Officers and Employees account. We can only surmise that this was done to circumvent the rules on the full liquidation of all cash advances as of year-end.  



Financial reports must be honestly prepared and must be a faithful representation of the actual status or balances of each account.  Manipulation thereof must not be adhered to just to comply with certain rules and regulations to derive the benefit from compliance therefrom. 



b)	Maddela Campus has long outstanding collectibles from the TESDA-Provincial Office of Quirino aggregating P1,996,828.00 (Annex AA).  Non-collection of these receivables portends that the revenues were not translated into funds that could have been allotted for the improvement of services and physical development of the Maddela Campus. 



c)	Due to Officers and Employee, with details presented in the table below, amounting to P671,136.99 pertain to collectibles from employees who are still active in service.  The aging of the accounts showed that they have been uncollected from approximately 3 to 5 years as of year-end.  Their collections could have been facilitated through salary deduction or any benefits due to them, yet these remained outstanding at the end of the year.



Further, collectibles from retired employees remained unsettled amounting to P30,830.00. The Finance department seemingly overlooked these obligations as clearance was issued upon their retirement.  Thus, in case of non-collection thereof, concerned personnel clearing them from financial obligations must be held liable.

	

Name

Particulars

Date

Amount

Status Of Employees

Aging











Yrs

Mos

1

Domingo, Ma. Rosa B.

CHED ESGP-PA SCHOLARSHIP (lost due to robbery; request for relief denied)

01/31/2016

 P   81,830.00 

Active

4

11

2

Domingo, Ma. Rosa B.

CHED ANAC-IP, GRANT- IN-AID SCHOLARSHIP (lost due to robbery; request for relief denied)

01/31/2016

 566,431.99 

Active

4

11

3

Agduyeng, Reynante

Swine Production

02/01/2018

 15,700.00 

Active

2

10

4

Bitamog, Rizal

Swine Production

02/01/2018

   2,500.00 

Active

2

10

5

Mangaccat, Ian Rhey

Swine Production

02/01/2018

   3,000.00 

Active

2

10

6

Viernes, Fely

Swine Production

02/01/2018

    1,675.00 

Active

2

10

 

Subtotal

 

 

P 671,136.99 

 

 

 

1

Ambrocio, Allen

Swine Production

02/01/2018

  22,330.00 

Retired (Deceased)

2

10

2

Pastor, Carbelito

Swine Production

02/01/2018

    1,000.00 

Retired

2

10

3

Sairez, George

Swine Production

02/01/2018

    7,500.00 

Retired

2

10

 

Subtotal

 

 

P   30,830.00 

 

 

 

 

TOTAL

 

 

P 701,966.99 

 

 

 



	10)	We recommended that Management:

	

a)	exert extra effort to locate or trace the documents to determine the name of the loan borrowers or students for the reconstruction of the unidentified balances in the books and to facilitate the collections of the receivables;



b)	maintain records of prior and current years’ receivables in a secure place and in an organized manner to facilitate easy retrieval of information and validation thereof; 



c)	exhaust all remedies to collect payments of these receivables, and if such efforts seemed futile, prepare the necessary documents to support a formal request for write off for these dormant accounts amounting to P4,834,131.29;



d)	instruct the University Accountant to revert the accounting entry made in reclassifying the unliquidated cash advance amounting to P10,410.00 and to present the reports correctly and honestly.  Prepare demand letter to be issued to the accountable officer to settle the said cash advance;



e)	instruct the Maddela Campus Accountant and other concerned personnel to coordinate with the TESDA-PO to collect the receivables amounting to P1,996,828.00, and prepare the necessary billing or demand letters, if necessary;



f)	instruct the Diffun and Maddela Campus Accountants to enforce collection from the active employees with financial obligations to the school through authorized salary deductions or any benefits due them; 



g)	instruct the Maddela Campus Accountant to prepare demand letters for those retired employees with unpaid obligations addressed to their last unknown addresses.  In case they are unresponsive, consider making the signatories in their clearances liable; and



h)	instruct the Maddela Campus Accountant to fill up properly the subsequent reports, particularly the information on dates the receivables were granted, based on available records or documents.

	11)	The Management contended that they already submitted some documents for the STUPAF Scholars and updated list of student borrowers. They also instructed the Accounting Office to take necessary steps in order to drop the dormant account of the University.



	12)	Also, the University Accountant had already taken up entry to correct the balance of Advances to Officers and Employees while the Accountant of Maddela Campus already initiated a reconciliation of Accounts from TESDA Provincial Office. Moreover, the Accountants notified the active employees with obligation to facilitate their settlement as soon as possible.





19)	Due to National Government Agencies (NGAs) account amounting to P3,661,216.25 cannot be ascertained and remained unliquidated because of non-preparation of Subsidiary Ledgers or other compensating organized records supporting thereof, thereby affecting the reliability and correctness the account and in violation of COA Circular No. 94-013 dated December 13, 1994.



	1)	Due to NGAs account is used to lodge the fund transfers from other national government agencies as Source Agencies (SA) in pursuit of their programs/projects in cooperation with the University as Implementing Agency (IA).  The balance represents the liability of the University to the said source agencies and is subject for liquidation.



	2)	Among the pertinent duties of the IA prescribed by COA Circular No. 94-013 dated December 13, 1994 are as follows:



a)	To maintain a separate subsidiary record for the trust liability whether or not a separate bank account is maintained;

b)	The Accountable Officer (AO) shall prepare the RCI and the RD within five (5) days after the end of each month, and shall submit them with all supporting vouchers/payrolls and documents to the Accountant.  These reports shall be approved by the Head of the Agency;



c)	The Accountant shall verify the Reports, provide accounting entries, record and submit the duplicate copies of the Reports with all the originals of vouchers/payrolls and all supporting documents to the IA Auditor within ten (10) days after receipt from the AO.  The Accountant shall ensure that only expenses for the project are included in the Reports.  He shall submit the original copy of the Reports to the SA (Attention: The SA Accountant);



d)	Return to the SA any unused balance and refund of disallowance upon completion of the project.



	3)	As of year-end, this account presented a balance of P41,204,142.83.  However, we noted that two projects have negative balances amounting to P176,290.49.  This was due to the over-recorded payables from the following projects:

Special Projects

Amount

Capacitating Farmers on Integrated Pest Management and Entrepreneurship for Sustainable Rural Development

 P 137,406.96 

Development of Clonal Propagation Protocols for Native Forest and Fruit - bearing Tree Species in Quirino and Nearby Provinces

38,883.53

TOTAL

P 176,290.49 



	4)	This means that the adjusted balance of the Due to NGAs account is actually P41,380,433.32.  Breakdown of the account revealed that only the amount of P37,542,926.58 can be clearly attributed to the Source Agencies, while the remaining amount of P3,661,216.25 remained undetermined (Annex BB).  The undetermined balance persisted for years but this was reduced substantially due to the commendable efforts of the Accounting Unit to breakdown these undetermined balances.  



	5)	The existence of undetermined balance means that the University failed to submit its liquidations, or if submitted, did not record the liquidations, hence the amount persisted and accumulated through the years.  The absence of organized records of receipt of funds and utilization thereof made the ability to liquidate the said funds difficult, and the actual balances of these undetermined fund transfers cannot be ascertained.



	6)	We recommended that Management:



a)	instruct the concerned accounting personnel to coordinate and gather documents/information from the past and present project leaders to reconstruct the details of each fund transfers in order to make the necessary reports to facilitate the liquidations of the completed and/or abandoned projects; and



b)	instruct all concerned personnel to strictly adhere to the provisions of COA Circular No. 94-013, most specially the proper accounting and recording of transactions, prompt liquidation and rendering reports of the funds, and returning to the SA any unutilized balances within a reasonable time.



	7)	The Accounting Office mentioned that they had already prepared Subsidiary Ledgers for each project. In addition, the Accounting Unit is on the process of reconciling the correct balances of all identified project in order to locate the remaining P3,837,506.74 undetermined amounts.





20)	Payment for honorarium and salary differential received by various employees amounting to P1,496,046.35 were not subjected to withholding tax when it was paid and released to employees, contrary to BIR rules and regulations on income taxes, thus, depriving the government of its income derived therefrom.

	1)	Section 4 of Revenue Regulation (RR) No. 12-2001, amending Section 2.57.4 of RR No. 2-98 provides the following:



	“Section 2.57.4 Time of Withholding – The obligation of the payor to deduct and withhold the tax under Section 2.57 of these Regulations arises at the time an income payment is paid or payable, or their income payment is paid or payable, or their income payment is accrued or recorded as an expense or asset, whichever is applicable, in the payor’s books, whichever comes first.  The term “payable” refers to the date the obligation becomes due, demandable or legally enforceable.”



	2)	Also, Chapter 1 of Title X of the Tax Code provides for the following applicable penalties for non-compliance with the existing laws and regulations relative to withholding of taxes:



a)	Civil Penalties under Section 248– a penalty equivalent to twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount due for failure to file any return and pay the tax due thereon as required on the date prescribed; in case of willful neglect  to file the return within the period prescribed, or in case a false or fraudulent return is willfully made, the penalty shall fifty percent (50%) of the tax or of the deficiency tax, in case, any payment has been made on the basis of such return before the discovery of the falsity or fraud.



b)	Interest under Section 249 - interest at the rate of twenty percent (20%) per annum on any unpaid amount of tax, from the date prescribed for payment until the amount is fully paid.



c)	Liability of the Withholding Agent equal to amount it should have withheld under Section 252- any person required to withhold, account for, and remit any tax imposed by this Code or who willfully fails to withhold such tax, or account for and remit such tax, or aids or abets in any manner to evade any such tax or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to other penalties provided for under this Chapter, be liable upon conviction to a penalty equal to the total amount of the tax not withheld, or not accounted for and remitted.



	3)	Relatedly, Section 3.11 of DBM, DOF, and COA Joint Circular No. 1-2000 dated January 3, 2000 explicitly states that all Heads of agencies and the respective Chief Accountants shall ensure that the taxes withheld are in accordance with the law and existing rules and regulations.  This Circular requires that the Accountants of the agency, being the person primarily responsible for the payroll of employees, shall ensure that taxes were being withheld from salaries and other benefits of the employees in compliance with the prescribed revenue regulations.  Otherwise, they shall be held liable for non-compliance with the existing tax laws and regulations relative to withholding as embodied under Revenue Memorandum Circular No. 21-2010.

	4)	The obligation of the agency to withhold taxes for compensation arises when the expense is already recorded whether or not the same has been paid. However, examination of disbursement vouchers revealed that salary differential of various employees amounting to P1,265,746.35 were not subjected to withholding taxes when it was paid and released to employees even if their taxable compensation income apparently exceeds the taxable compensation income of P250,000.00, basing from their basic salary. These were summarized in the next table:



Annual Taxable Compensation Range

Total Amount of Salary Differential

Applicable Graduated Tax Rate

Should-be Withholding Tax

P250,000 to P400,000

P    545,147.16

20%

P 109,029.43

P400,000 to P800,000

565,645.20

25%

141,411.30

P800,000 to P2,000,000

154,953.99

30%

46,486.20

 TOTAL 

P 1,265,746.35



P 296,926.93

                             (See ANNEX CC for the details)



	5)	Additionally, there are noted cases wherein salary differentials of employees were subjected to withholding taxes, however, the withheld taxes were deficient because incorrect tax rates were applied in computing the amount, to wit:



Date

Name of Payee

Total Amount of Salary Differential

 Tax Withheld 

Should-be Tax Withheld 

Tax Deficiency

07/20/2020

Joel Carig, et. al.

P   21,730.00 

P  4,346.00 

P   4,916.15 

P    (570.15) 

09/03/2020

Jovita A. Reyes, et. al.

   88,268.53 

17,653.83 

18,907.92 

(1,254.09)

TOTAL

 

P 109,998.53 

P 21,999.83 

P 23,824.07 

P (1,824.24) 



	6)	Although the amount of withholding tax can be corrected and adjusted during year-end, the Accounting Unit is reminded to be more cautious and careful in computing taxes that are to be monthly withheld/deducted from the salary payroll of concerned employees. Regardless of the amount of tax deficiencies, these are still considered income accruing to the government which could possibly be substantial, if aggregated, and such amounts could have been used to defray current expenditures of the government. Hence, it is clearly disadvantageous on the part of the government if the correct amount of taxes were not collected and remitted to government funds.



	7)	The withholding of tax shall be made upon every payment or accrual or recording of salaries of employees in the Books of Accounts of the agency, however, the Accounting Unit failed to follow this ruling of the BIR on withholding of taxes on compensation. They contended that even if taxes were not withheld when salary differentials were paid, they usually made adjustments at year-end which is contrary to the above-stated regulations on the timing of withholding of taxes. Be it noted that failure to withhold tax on compensation and its year-end adjustment would result to possible imposition of additional tax liabilities and penalties as mentioned in the above Tax Code.



	8)	Moreover, audit of the disbursement vouchers for the payment of honoraria of employees who are assigned in Special Projects revealed that an aggregate amount of P239,100.00 was not also subjected to withholding taxes in Maddela Campus. It was determined that the Accountant of Maddela Campus failed to subject these honoraria to withholding tax and were not included in the taxable compensation of the recipients, thus, their income taxes for the CY 2020 were deficient. The claimed honoraria for 2020 not subjected to withholding taxes were summarized on the next table:



Name of Payee

Name of Project

Designation

Total Amount

Should-be Amount of Tax Withheld

Narcisa Aganon

Commercialization of QSU Maddela Vermicompost in Support to Organic Rice, Coffee and Vegetables Growers in Quirino Province

Project Leader

  P  96,800.00 

  P 29,040.00 



Support to Mass Production of Vermicast/Vermicompost in the province of Quirino

Project Leader

    36,000.00 

   10,800.00 

Juanita Tolentino

Commercialization of QSU Maddela Vermicompost in Support to Organic Rice, Coffee and Vegetables Growers in Quirino Province

Study Leader

 97,500.00 

 29,250.00 

TOTAL

 

 

P 230,300.00 

  P 69,090.00 

(See details in Annex DD)



	9)	Pursuant to BIR Ruling No. 494-18, honoraria and allowances, no matter how negligible the amount, are wealth that flow into the hands of the recipient, hence subject to income tax and consequently, subject to withholding tax on compensation. The noted employees have an employee-employer relationship with the University, thus, income tax must be imposed on the claimed honoraria and should have been deducted by the Accounting Unit the amount of P69,090.00 from the claims of these employees.  The tax deficiencies of the recipients constituted lost revenue on the part of the government.



	10)	The importance of withholding of tax allows the government to collect the income tax monthly.  The said withholding taxes should have been remitted earlier, thus, in effect, deprived the government of early income in the amount of P367,841.17 that could have already accrued to the National Treasury to fund government spending and various public expenditures.   The monthly requirement to withhold and remit tax guarantees continuous revenue inflows to the National Treasury and helps prevent delinquencies or revenue loss.  It ensures the collection of all income tax which can otherwise be lost or substantially reduced through failure to withhold and file the corresponding returns.  On the other hand, the untimely withholding of taxes may also cause inconvenience to the affected employees because it distorts their financial budgets when these taxes are deducted from their salaries or benefits on one-time basis or during year-end.



	11)	Thus, the correct and timely imposition of withholding taxes on all compensations and benefits of employees pursuant to BIR rules and regulations must be adhered faithfully and properly.



	12)	We recommended that Management:



a)	adhere to the provisions of Revenue Regulation (RR) No. 12-2001 and other BIR Rules and Regulations, particularly on the withholding of taxes upon recognition of the expenses and to remit them accordingly.  



b)	require the Accounting Unit to recompute the above employee’s taxable compensation income and the tax due thereof. Also, withhold from the employee’s salaries any tax deficiency, most specially those who received the untaxed honoraria in Maddela Campus, and remit the same to the BIR to avoid the imposition of tax liabilities and penalties;



c)	instruct the Accounting Unit of Maddela Campus to include in the computation of the employees’ taxable compensation income all honoraria and allowances accruing to the employees and determine the corresponding tax to be withheld, to avoid one-time withholding of taxes that would distort the financial capacity of the University personnel; and



d)	apprise the Accountants on possible penalties that might be imposed on them for not complying with the prescribed provisions on withholding of taxes.



	13)	The Management instructed the Accountants to follow the provisions of Revenue Regulation (RR) No. 12-2001 that the withholding of tax shall be made upon every payment or accrual or recording of salaries of employees in the books of accounts.



	14)	With regards to the computation of previous withholding tax, the Accounting Unit of Maddela Campus requested that the amount shall be included in the current year 2021 so that it would not be burdensome for the concerned employees to pay the accruing tax.







21)	Due to BIR/GSIS/PAG-IBIG/PHILHEALTH



	1)	Data gathered from the accounting records showed that unremitted contributions withheld as of year-end are as follows: 



Inter-agency Payables

As at December 31, 2020

Due to BIR

P 1,833,965.87

Due to GSIS

834,815.09

Due to Pag-IBIG

447,469.04

Due to PhilHealth

273,705.24

TOTAL

P 3,389,955.24



	2)	Some of the amounts were withheld from previous years which remained unremitted.  The Accounting Unit has not fully determined the particulars of these unremitted balances.



	3)	Considering this, we recommended that Management should require the Accounting Unit to analyze the accounting entry made and other documents relevant thereto, and prepare the necessary adjustments to ensure that the withheld funds and its remittances are correctly recorded and presented in the books of accounts.  Also, remit in full all the funds withheld in a particular month, promptly and regularly, to avoid accumulation of unremitted balances.



	4)	The Management already required the Accounting Unit to analyze the accounting entry made and other documents relevant thereto, and to prepare the necessary adjustments to ensure that the withheld funds and its remittances are correctly recorded and presented in the books of accounts.  Also, the Management required to remit in full all the funds withheld in a particular month, promptly and regularly, to avoid accumulation of unremitted balances.





22)	Gender and Development (GAD)



The GAD Focal Person and Coordinators did not submit the GAD Accomplishment Report (GAR) for CY 2020, contrary to provisions of the Magna Carta of Women (MCW) and Philippine Commission on Women (PCW) Memorandum Circulars (MC).



	1)	Item 1.2.2.3 of Memorandum Circular prescribes the schedule of GPB preparation, submission, and review for State Universities and Colleges (SUCs) as follows:  



August to September 2019

SUCs prepare and submit their FY 2020 GPBs to CHED, for review.

September 9, 2019

Deadline of SUCs for the encoding and submission of FY 2020 GPBs through the GMMS, for review of CHED

October 14, 2019

Deadline for CHED to submit to PCW the reviewed FY 2020 GPBs of SUCs through the Gender Mainstreaming Monitoring System (GMMS)

August – November 2019

PCW reviews submitted GPBs.

Agencies shall resubmit their GPBs if there are revisions to be made.

PCW endorses acceptable GPBs.



	2)	On the other hand, PCW Memorandum Circular 2021-01 provides that the deadline of SUCs for the encoding and submission of FY 2020 GAD Accomplishment Reports (ARs) to Commission on Higher Education (CHED) Regional Offices is on February 26, 2021.  After which, the CHED Regional Office shall transmit the GAD AR to the CHED Central Office. Once the GAD AR is acceptable to the CHED Central Office, it shall submit the GAD AR to PCW.  The FY 2020 GAD ARs submitted to PCW shall be authenticated by the GMMS with a barcode. Concerned agencies shall print the GMMS-authenticated GAD AR for the signature of their agency head and submit signed copies to PCW and their respective COA Audit Team.



	3)	As of this writing, the GAD Plan and Budget was already submitted while the GAD Focal Person and the GAD Coordinators have yet to submit the GAD Accomplishment Report.  Because of the absence of the report, our team was precluded to conduct an audit or assessment on the appropriateness of the GAD activities conducted by the University.



	4)	We recommended that the GAD Focal Person and the GAD Coordinators abide by the rules and regulations on the preparation and submission of GPB and GAD AR, and furnish a copy to the Office of the Auditor.



	   

23)	STATUS OF SUSPENSION, DISALLOWANCES AND CHARGES

 

	1)	As at December 31, 2020, suspensions, disallowances and charges have the following balances:



 

 

Beginning Bal. Jan. 1, 2020

 

This Period January 1 to December 31,2020

Ending Bal. Dec. 31, 2020

 





NS/ND/NC

NSSDC



Notice of Suspension

0

0

0

0

Notice of Disallowance

315,082.18

0

231,567.26

83,514.92

Notice of Charge

0

0

0

0



	2)	For the current year, there are no Notice of Disallowances (NDs), Notice of Suspensions (NSs) and Notice of Charges (NCs) issued.



	3)	The disallowances enumerated below have become final and executory, and the corresponding COA Execution Orders (COEs) have been issued.  As of year-end, nine (9) were fully settled and remaining unsettled disallowances have ending balance of P83,514.92.





Date

ND No.

Disallowance

Settlement

Balance

Status

1

11/09/15

ND 2015-16-164-(14)

2,495.00

1,867.26

627.74

Partially Settled

2

11/09/15

ND 2015-10-164-(14)

2,700.00

2,700.00

0.00

Fully settled

3

11/09/15



2,700.00

2,700.00

0.00

Fully settled

4

11/09/15



2,700.00

2,700.00

0.00

Fully settled

5

11/09/15

ND 2015-11-164-(14)

8,100.00

8,100.00

0.00

Fully settled

6

11/09/15

ND 2015-19-164-(14)

2,700.00

0.00

2,700.00

No Action

7

07/23/2019

ND  2019-001-01-(2018)

108,000.00

108,000.00

0.00

Fully settled

8

07/23/2019

ND 2019-002-05-(2018)

32,000.00

10,000.00

22,000.00

Partially Settled

9

07/23/2019

 ND 2019-003-05-(2018)

32,000.00

1,000.00

31,000.00

Partially Settled

10

08/01/2019

ND 2019-005-01-(2018)

30,687.18

28,000.00

2,687.18

Partially Settled

11

08/01/2019

ND 2019-006-01-(2018)

4,500.00

0.00

4,500.00

Not yet Settled

12

08/01/2019

ND 2019-007-01-(2018)

9,000.00

0.00

9,000.00

Not yet Settled

13

08/01/2019

ND 2019-008-01-(2018)

4,500.00

0.00

4,500.00

Not yet Settled

14

08/01/2019

ND 2019-009-01-(2018) 

13,500.00

13,500.00

0.00

Fully settled

15

08/01/2019

ND 2019-010-01-(2018)

4,500.00

4,500.00

0.00

Fully settled

16

08/01/2019

ND 2019-011-01-(2019) 

4,500.00

500.00

4,000.00

Partially Settled

17

08/01/201

ND 2019-012-01-(2018) 

9,000.00

9,000.00

0.00

Fully settled

18

08/01/2019

ND 2019-013-01-(2018)

9,000.00

9,000.00

0.00

Fully settled

19

08/01/2019

ND 2019-014-01-(2019)

4,500.00

2,000.00

2,500.00

Partially Settled

 

TOTAL

 

287,082.18

203,567.26

83,514.92

 



	4)	Meanwhile, prior to the implementation of the RRSA, the agency has an unsettled disallowance of P11,093,914.84 under Certificate of Settlement and Balances No. 95-004-101 (94) & (95). This unsettled disallowance is reflected quarterly in the Report and Analysis of Disallowances and Charges.  This amount represents the deficiencies noted by the COA TAS RO2 in the construction of the college administration building.  However, the identified liable persons are no longer connected to the University and some are already deceased.



	5)	The Management was reminded on the following provisions of COA Circular No. 2009-006 dated September 15, 2009:



	6)	Section 16.3 provides that:



	“The liability of persons determined to be liable under an ND/NC shall be solidary and the Commission may go against any person liable without prejudice to the latter’s claim against the rest of the persons liable.” (emphasis ours)



	7)	Section 7.1.3 provides, among others, the responsibility of the Agency Head, to wit:



“He shall enforce the COA Order of Execution (COE) by requiring the withholding of salaries or other compensation due the person liable in satisfaction of the disallowance or charge.”



	8)		Section 23.4 states that:

	

	“The Auditor shall monitor the implementation of the COE and report to the Director the action taken by the agency thereon.  Unsettled COEs shall be referred to the General Counsel for appropriate action including referral to the Office of the Solicitor General and the Ombudsman.” (emphasis ours)

	

	9)		The University President was advised to impose the refund of these disallowances from all or any of the liable persons of the particular NDs that have become final and executory to avoid legal repercussions for non-compliance of the COEs related thereto. 

	

31



30









