





	OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

	

	

A)	 FINANCIAL AND COMPLIANCE AUDIT



Cash and Cash Equivalents

	

1)	Breakdown of controls were identified in the audit of collections and deposits of Accountable Officers (AOs).

	

	Section 69 (1) of Presidential Decree (PD) No. 1445, otherwise known as the Government Auditing Code of the Philippines, on deposit of moneys in the treasury, provides that:

	

Public officers authorized to receive and collect moneys arising from taxes, revenues, or receipts of any kind shall remit or deposit intact the full amounts so received and collected by them to the treasury of the agency concerned and credited to the particular accounts to which the said moneys belong. (emphases supplied)

Xxx.



Moreover, Appendix 26 of Government Accounting Manual (GAM) for National Government Agencies (NGAs), Volume II provides that “Collections should be deposited intact daily.  The balance of collections not deposited during the day due to cut-off should be deposited on the first banking hour of the next working day.”



Nonetheless, COA Memorandum No. 2013-004 or the Revised Cash Examination Manual added that, when collections are minimal and daily deposit thereof becomes impractical, the Collecting Officers (COs) shall deposit their collections at least once a week, or as soon as the collections reach ₱10,000.



Section 39, Chapter 5 of the GAM for NGAs, Volume I, on the Reporting of Collections and Deposits, also states that:



a)	At the close of the business day, the Collecting Officers shall prepare the Report of Collections and Deposits (RCD) for submission to Accounting Office/Unit. The report lists all the ORs issued in numerical sequence including cancelled ones.



b)	The RCD shall be supported by documentary evidence such as duplicate copies of ORs and validated deposit slips. 

Xxx.



Verification of the RCDs for the period covered by the cash examination of the AOs and reconciliation thereof with the cashbook, official receipts (ORs) and validated deposit slips, revealed discrepancies as well as irregularities in the handling of deposits and collections of the following officers:



Accountable Officer

Position

Deficiencies

A

Collecting Officer/SDO - Castilla

--	Deposits of collections reported in the cashbook did not reflect actual dates of deposits; 

--	Errors in preparation of deposit slips though properly adjusted thru the Accounting Unit 

B

Cashier II - Bulan

--	Error in preparation of deposit slips that was incorrectly remedied by offsetting collections from other funds



For the Collecting Officer of Castilla Campus, review of entries made by the AO in the cashbook showed no undeposited collections in the balance column since credits are reflected immediately after each debit entry, as if it was actually deposited daily.  However, validated deposit slips showed otherwise, thus, the balance column of the cashbook does not reflect the actual cash in the possession of the AO at the end of each day. Most of these undeposited collections were detected only at a later date. Moreover, there were instances when collections and deposits were totally not reported in the cashbook but included in the RCD submitted. 



Likewise, beginning balances in several RCDs that were forwarded from previous reports were different from the ending balances reflected as of the last reporting month and were not supported with ORs. The differing amounts resulted in unaccounted balances that were carried forward in the succeeding periods and remained undetected by the AO since these were also not reflected in the cashbook. 



Initial reconciliation statement of accountability prepared by the Auditor showed a cash shortage of ₱10,241, thus, a letter of demand was issued to the AO.  Upon further reconciliation and re-validation of prior years’ RCDs and cash examination reports, said errors became evident. After reflecting the adjustments, the schedule of collections and deposits showed a net cash shortage amounting to ₱64. The net shortages were settled by the AO through bank deposit on February 25, 2021 and December 14, 2020 for the Special Trust Fund (STF) and Income Generating Project (IGP) funds, respectively.



Particulars

Collections (₱)

Total (₱)



 (STF) 

(IGP)



Balance of Cash Accountability, as of date of count

   24,715.80 

 (18,535.50)

 6,180.30 

Cash and cash items presented during the count

3,476.00 

2,640.00 

6,116.00 

Cash Shortage (Overage)

21,239.80 

(21,175.50)

64.30 

Error in Deposits in March 2020

(21,230.00)

    21,230.00 

0.00

Net Cash Shortage

            9.80 

           54.50 

      64.30 

Moreover, the error in deposit in March 2020 that was noted during reconciliation was due to the inadvertent error in the preparation of deposit slips between the two funds. This was adjusted through disbursement from IGP account on June 19, 2020 drawn under Check No. 1426530 and deposited to STF account on June 25, 2020. 



As for the Collecting Officer/Cashier of Bulan Campus, irregularities on deposits of collections between Special Trust Fund (STF) and Income Generating Projects (IGP) Fund for the months of March to July 2020 were noted as follows:



Period

STF-Undergraduate

IGP



Amount (₱)

Amount (₱)

CY 2020

Collections

Deposit

Balance

Collections

Deposit

Balance

March

4,170.00 

8,170.00 

 (4,000.00)

67,100.00 

63,100.00 

4,000.00 

April

no collections and deposits

no collections and deposits

May

595.00 

160.00 

 (3,565.00)

5,000.00 

5,435.00 

3,565.00 

June

3,145.00 

0.00

 (420.00)

22,500.00 

25,645.00 

420.00 

July

4,325.00 

3,905.00 

0.00

31,950.00 

32,370.00 

0.00

Total

     12,235.00 

     12,235.00 

0.00

  126,550.00 

  126,550.00 

0.00



		As can be gleaned from the table above, collections for IGP for the month of March amounting to ₱4,000 was inadvertently deposited to the STF account, resulting in overstatement and understatement by the said amount in the STF and IGP accounts, respectively. Consequently, collections from STF for the succeeding months were deposited by the AO to the IGP account to offset the previous over-deposit. 

	

	To remedy the error, the AO treated this as an advance deposit to the STF account and waited for the succeeding collections to counterbalance with the IGP account.  This action is inappropriate since the understated account will only be corrected depending on the amount of collections from STF account for the succeeding periods which in this case, took four months before the balances for the two accounts were settled. As a result, May to June 2020 STF collections were not deposited to the appropriate bank account.  On the other hand, IGP account reflected undeposited collections from May to June, not in keeping with the cited regulations. 

	

	Had the AO reported the error to the Accounting Unit, necessary adjusting entries and authorized transfer of funds to correct the error could have been made. 

	

		Overall, the errors in the reporting of collections and deposits both in the RCD and cashbook, slow down the reconciliation process and hinder in establishing the correct cash balance as of the date of count. Also, the practice of offsetting collections and deposits between two different funds is unacceptable and connotes weak internal control as well as poor cash management practice, thus, exposing government funds to risk of possible loss and/or misappropriation.

	

	

	

	

		We recommended and Management agreed to require the AOs to:

	

a)	Be cautious in the preparation of deposit slips by verifying the total balances of collections at the end of the day subject for deposit to each fund before accomplishing deposit slips to prevent errors; and



b)		Stop the practice of assigning collections from one fund to be deposited to another account so as to offset previous errors in the deposits made. If collections were inadvertently deposited to another account, immediately notify the Accounting Office and cause the adjustment thereof by drawing a check based on a duly approved disbursement voucher. 





2)	Eight AOs were granted cash advances and acted as Special Disbursing Officers (SDOs) without an explicit and official designation.



Section 3.2 of COA Circular No. 97-002 dated February 10, 1997 states that special cash advances are those granted on the explicit authority of the Head of the Agency only to duly designated disbursing officers or employees for legally authorized purposes. (emphasis supplied)



Similarly, Section 4.1.5 of the same Circular also states that only duly appointed or designated disbursing officers may perform disbursing functions.



During the cash examinations, it was noted that eight AOs with the following positions were actually performing functions as SDOs for quite some time but were not able to provide the Auditor with copies of valid and official designation as SDO, thus, their authority to draw cash advances cannot be readily established.





Position

1.

VP for Administration

2.

VP for Academics

3.

Campus Administrator - Main

4.

Campus Administrator - Magallanes

5.

Supply Officer - Castilla

6.

Supply Officer - Magallanes

7.

Supply Officer - Bulan

8.

Cashier II -SDO for BOT expenses



The above officials were able to draw cash advances for various purposes related to their positions and made payments from their cash advances without written or explicit authority to act as such. They were allowed to draw cash advances because they were bonded and were the personnel who could most conveniently handle the cash advances pertaining to a certain purpose or activity of the College. This, however, is not consistent with Section 4.1.5 of the above Circular. Nevertheless, the absence of such explicit authority precluded the Auditor in verifying whether the funds were granted and actually disbursed in consonance with the legally authorized specific purpose.



We recommended and Management agreed to comply by issuing an explicit and specific designation to appoint accountable officers as SDOs before the grant of cash advances, in compliance with COA Circular No. 97-002 dated February 10, 1997.





3)	Nine AOs did not observe proper handling of cashbook, contrary to Section 6 of COA Circular No. 97-002.



Sections 6.2 to 6.3 of COA Circular No. 97-002 dated February 10, 1997 on the handling, custody and disposition of the cashbook states that: 



6.2 The AO shall maintain separate cashbooks for salaries, wages, allowances, etc. and for petty operating expenses. The AO shall record the transactions in the prescribed cashbook daily. He may record each invoice/receipt/voucher individually or the total disbursements for the day depending on the volume of the transactions; 	



6.3	The AO shall reconcile the book balance with the cash on hand daily. He shall foot and close the books at the end of each month. The AO and the Accountant shall reconcile their books of accounts at least quarterly; xxx



Likewise, Section 32, Chapter 6 of the GAM for NGAs, Volume I, requires that the SDO shall maintain the Cash Disbursement Record (CDRec) to monitor and control the granting and utilization of cash advance.

	

Examination of the cashbooks of the AOs presented during the count showed various deficiencies as follows:





Position

Deficiencies

1.

VP for Administration

--	no Cashbook

2.

Campus Administrator - Main

--	no Cashbook

3.

VP for Academics

--	not in the prescribed format (used a Logbook only)

--	not properly footed, balanced and ruled

4.

Head, Supply/Property Unit

--	not properly maintained and filled-out

--	not in the prescribed format 

--	not properly footed, balances and ruled

5.

Board Secretary

--	no Cashbook

6.

Supply Officer - Bulan

--	no Cashbook

7.

Campus Administrator - Magallanes

--	not properly maintained and filled-out since transactions were not chronologically recorded and were posted in only one cashbook, regardless of fund cluster and nature of cash advance. 

--	not properly footed, balances and ruled.

--	Incomplete recording of transactions

8.

Collecting Officer/SDO - Castilla

--	Incomplete recording of cash advances and liquidations

9.

Cashier II - Bulan

--	Incomplete recording of cash advances and liquidations

 

Overall, the absence or improper/incomplete handling and maintenance of cashbook precluded the immediate reconciliation between the AO and accounting records which affected the completeness, accuracy and reliability of the balances reflected, both in the cashbook and subsidiary ledgers. Moreover, cash accountabilities could not be readily monitored or reconciled and exposes funds to risks of possible loss and/or misappropriations.



We recommended and Management agreed to require the AOs to maintain appropriate cashbooks and observe complete recording of transactions in the records including proper handling and disposition thereof pursuant to Section 6 of COA Circular No. 97-002 dated February 10, 1997.





4)	Four AOs were granted cash advances beyond the maximum cash accountability allowed under their fidelity bond coverage. 

	

	Section 7.1 of COA Circular No. 97-002 dated February 10, 1997, as amended by COA Circular No. 2006-005 dated July 13, 2006 provides that “Each accountable officer whose total cash accountability is not less than ₱5,000.00 shall be bonded. The amount of bond shall depend on the total accountability of the officer as fixed by the Head of the Agency. An official or employee who has both money and property accountability, shall be bonded only once to cover both accountabilities, but the amount of the bond shall be in accordance with the Schedule issued by the Bureau of Treasury”. 

	

	Section 7.3 of the same COA Circular states that “When the accountability is increased, the Accountant shall ensure that additional bond is applied for”.

	

	Review of the AO’s fidelity bond confirmation coverage and verification of the schedule of cash advances and liquidations for the period covered by the cash examination for each AO revealed that cash advances were granted to them, exceeding their maximum cash accountabilities, as follows:



Accountable Officer

Position

Maximum Cash Accountability (₱)

CA Granted

(₱)

A   

Head, Supply/Property Unit

250,000.00 

     525,765.00 

B    

Supply Officer - Bulan

₱0.00 

(bonded for Property only) 

       51,000.00 

C    

Collecting Officer/SDO - Magallanes

750,000.00 

  2,220,000.00 

D   

Collecting Officer/SDO - Castilla

1,000,000.00 

  1,260,000.00 



Although the cash advances were satisfactorily liquidated as of December 31, 2020, the incorrect practice of granting cash advances beyond the maximum cash accountability covered by the AO’s fidelity bond cannot be disregarded. 



The practice of granting cash advances to accountable officers, in amounts exceeding their maximum cash accountability as insured under the Fidelity Fund exposed the agency to risks of possible losses due to non-indemnification in cases of defalcation, shortages or unrelieved losses that might occur in the safekeeping of such funds. 



We recommended and Management agreed to strictly require the following:



a)	For the Accountant to regularly check the updated copy of fidelity bond coverage of the AO before processing the request for cash advance and ensure that the amounts granted are within the maximum cash accountability of each AO. Otherwise, cause the application of additional bond of the AO for the increase in accountability; and



b)	For the AO to be cautious in observing his maximum cash accountability and promptly inform the Cashier/Accounting Department should his current balance or cash advance granted exceeds the allowable amount per approved bond.





5)		Petty Cash Fund (PCF) was not immediately replenished when the disbursements reached at least 75 per cent and was closed at year-end.

	 

	Section 4.3.1 of COA Circular No. 97-002 dated February 07, 1997 states that the cash advance for petty operating expenses shall be sufficient for the recurring expenses of the agency for one month. The AO may request replenishment of the cash advance when the disbursements reach at least 75 per cent, or as the need requires, by submitting a replenishment voucher with all the supporting documents duly summarized in a report of disbursements.



Likewise, Section 35, Chapter 6 of GAM for NGAs, Volume I, states:

	

Xxx.

	b. The unused balance of the PCF shall not be closed/refunded at the end of the year. The fund shall be closed only upon termination, separation, retirement or dismissal of the Petty Cash Fund Custodian (PCFC), who in turn shall refund any balance to close his/her cash accountability; and



	c. At the end of the year, the PCFC shall submit to the Accounting Division/Unit all unreplenished Petty Cash Vouchers (PCVs) for recording in the books of accounts.



	Furthermore, Section 54, Chapter 19 of the same Manual on Financial Reporting, states that, at the end of the year, all unreplenished Petty Cash Fund expenses shall be reported and supporting papers submitted to the Accounting Division/Unit, to recognize the expenses incurred to the period which they relate. In case no replenishment could be made for lack of fund, a JEV shall be prepared to recognize all the expenses paid under the Petty Cash with a credit to the account “Petty Cash”. If replenishment is made, the credit shall be the appropriate cash account.

	

			Analysis of the disbursements and replenishments of the PCF for the period covered by the cash examination of each officer showed that replenishments were not immediately prepared and submitted by the AO when the disbursements reach at least 75 per cent.  The PCFC prepared replenishment reports only when the fund was near to exhaustion, or expenses reached and even exceeded the established amount of PCF, thus, the remaining PCF balances upon replenishment are not sufficient to cover the succeeding petty expenses.

	

			Below are the deficiencies noted on the concerned PCFC with individual petty cash funds totalling ₱20,000 for all funds. 

	

Accountable Officer

Position

Deficiencies

Turn-around Time

A

Collecting Officer/SDO - Magallanes

--	PCF not immediately replenished when disbursements reach 75 per cent.

8 to 52 Calendar Days

B

Collecting Officer/SDO – Castilla

--	PCF not immediately replenished when disbursements reach 75 per cent

--	Closed at year-end

12 to 62 Calendar Days

C

Cashier II - Bulan

--	PCF not immediately replenished when disbursements reach 75 per cent

--	Closed at year-end

8 to 50 Calendar Days

	

			The AOs disclosed that some of the petty operating expenses were actually paid out of personal money of some personnel of the Campus while waiting for the receipt of the next replenishment. These expenses were supported by official receipts and sales invoices that were already presented for reimbursement from the PCF but were not yet reimbursed due to lack of cash available. It was also noted that the replenishment vouchers submitted to the Accounting Unit were not timely processed, thus, contributing further to the prolonged turn-around period of replenishments and incurrence of PCF overdrafts. 

	

Considering the turn-around time from the preparation of PCF replenishments and the processing period up to the actual receipt of fund replenishments, the insufficiency of the remaining cash balance to cover the urgent needs of the Campus is evident. The PCFC should have prepared and submitted a replenishment report as soon as the disbursements reached 75 per cent of the total fund or even earlier, if necessary.

	

			We understand the good intention of the initiative made by the AO and other personnel of the Campus to pay the petty expenses of the Campus out of personal money so as not to hamper its operations, but this situation could have been avoided had the concerned AO and Accounting Unit exerted extra efforts in the early preparation of requests for replenishment and its timely processing to ensure prompt release of subsequent replenishments.



			The delayed preparation of requests for replenishments, its prolonged processing and release of fund replenishment resulted in the depletion of the PCF and the incurrence of petty expenses paid from personal money, thus, defeated the purpose of petty cash fund to provide immediate cash resource when the need arises.

		

It was also noted that for Castilla and Bulan Campuses, the PCF under the General Fund (GF) was closed/liquidated at the end of the CY 2019.  These were liquidated and the remaining balance refunded to the Cashier at the end of the year, thereby closing, the Petty Cash account. Subsequently, a new PCF was set-up at the ensuing year for the same amount. On the other hand, PCF under IGP was continuously replenished during the period covered by the cash examination which shows inconsistency in the accounting of petty cash fund adjustments.



The practice of liquidating/closing the entire PCF as of year-end and setting up another PCF at succeeding year is inconsistent with the provisions of the GAM for NGAs. Correspondingly, this affects the proper valuation of Petty Cash under the Cash and Cash Equivalents account in the financial statements.  

	

We recommended and Management concurred to take the following courses of actions: 



a)	Require the PCFC to strictly monitor the disbursements from the Petty Cash Fund and immediately prepare and submit replenishment reports when the disbursements reach at least 75 per cent or as the need requires;



b)	Direct the Accounting Office to expedite the processing of petty cash replenishments to avoid the depletion of the PCF of the campuses that may hamper its operations; and



c)	Remind the Accounting Office to strictly adhere to Section 35, Chapter 6 and Section 54, Chapter 19 of GAM for NGAs in accounting for petty cash fund adjustments.



6)		The AO assigned at the Supply Office did not prepare and submit the monthly Report of Accountability for Accountable Forms (RAAF) while the Collecting Officer at Castilla Campus did not properly accomplish the same report.

	

Section 17, Chapter 8 of the GAM for NGAs, Volume I, states that a Report of Accountability for Accountable Forms (RAAF) shall be prepared by the Accountable Officer to report on the movement and status of accountable forms in his/her possession. The accountable forms include those with or without face value.



Appendix 67 of GAM for NGAs, Volume II presented the prescribed format of the RAAF and provided further instructions that the RAAF is to be used by each Accountable Officer to report the result of the physical count of all accountable forms, with or without face value such as checks, stamps, official receipts, LDDAP-ADA, etc., in his/her custody. It shall be prepared monthly and by fund cluster. (emphasis supplied) 



Section 95 of Government Accounting and Auditing Manual (GAAM), Volume I requires that Collecting Officers/Treasurers/Property Officers accountable for receipts, stamps and other accountable forms in their possession or in the hands of deputies and other employees entrusted therewith, shall keep adequate permanent record books which should show, among other things, the whereabouts of the accountable forms with which they are charged, the name and title of the officer or employee to whom such forms have been given, and the evidence of the receipt and subsequent sale and issuance of the same. The record books shall contain the following column headings:



a.	Booklet Number/Quantity (in case of official receipt without money value)

b.	Serial Number/Total value (in case of official receipt with money value)

c.	Name (in print) of accountable officer to whom issued

d.	Signature of accountable officer

e.	Date received by accountable officer

f.	Date reported totally used, sold, issued



These columns shall be utilized for recording consecutively all accountable forms in the order they are received in the office of the Collecting Officer/Treasurer/Property Officer concerned. The recording of each batch of accountable forms received shall be headed by data on the invoice number and date, the date the accountable forms were received, the quantity, and the inclusive serial numbers and/or total value of the accountable forms.

As staff of the Property/Supply Unit, the concerned AO is responsible for the initial receipt of deliveries of Accountable Forms (AF) No. 51-C or Official Receipts purchased by the agency. The AO maintains an inventory record of said AF and monitors the receipt and issuance thereof to the different cashiers/collecting officers of the four campuses of SSC through a logbook only. Inspection of the logbook showed that all official receipts received by the AO were listed in series while the corresponding issuance was evidenced by the recipient’s signature only, without a printed name, and the date of issuance affixed beside the corresponding series of ORs. There were instances when the official receipts are actually issued to various campuses but has no indication of receipt by the collecting officers in the logbook.  



The non-preparation of monthly RAAF by the concerned AO presented difficulty in reconciling the accountability for accountable forms of the cashiers/collecting officers of all campuses. Moreover, the absence of a monthly RAAF consequently results in the absence as well, of a concurrence or certification by the AO of the receipts, issuance or transfers of such ORs during the month, thus, the movement, status and final accountability for the accountable forms cannot be fully ascertained.



On the other hand, review of the monthly RAAF submitted by the Collecting Officer at Castilla Campus, revealed irregularities in the presentation of movement/status of official receipts. Some of the RAAFs showed ending balances of ORs from the preceding month that do not correspond with the beginning balances for the month being reported. Also, ORs presented in the RAAF were not classified as to fund. Upon verification of the issuance of the ORs through the RCDs submitted, it was noted and also confirmed by the AO that the ORs used for IGP collections were pulled out from the last stubs of ORs assigned initially for STF collections. This happened as newly received ORs were not classified by the AO as to fund prior to their use or issue. It was also observed that ORs were not issued in strict numerical sequence. There were instances when actual date of issuance as written in the ORs were different as reported in the RCDs submitted. Although the period covered for the issued ORs with discrepancies on dates were within the same month, the incorrect practice contributed to difficulty in determining the actual inventory of accountable forms at any given time.



In effect, the improper preparation of RAAFs does not reflect the actual movement and status of ORs, thus, final accountability for the accountable forms cannot be readily established which poses risks of possible loss or misuse of official receipts.



We recommended and Management acknowledged to require:



a)	The AO assigned at the Supply Office to prepare a monthly RAAFs using the prescribed format and submit the same to the Office of the Auditor;



b)	The Collecting Officer at Castilla Campus to: 



b.1	Strictly observe the numerical sequence in the issuance of official receipts and ensure that the actual date of issuance of official receipts corresponds with the RCDs and the cashbook; and



b.2	Observe consistent and accurate preparation of the RAAFs, as prescribed under GAM for NGAs, Volumes I and II, to reflect the actual movement and status of ORs, by assigning newly received ORs as to fund, in numerical sequence, and refrain from using them interchangeably to avoid confusion and error.

	

	

	Cash in Bank

	

7)	The accuracy of the balances of the Cash in Bank accounts of the College as of December 31, 2020, in the amount of ₱215.74 million could not be ascertained in view of the material variance of ₱84.36 million between the book and bank records due to the inability to prepare Bank Reconciliation Statements (BRS) for all bank accounts and non-maintenance of updated subsidiary ledgers (SLs).



Section 74 of PD No. 1445 states that: “At the close of each month, depositories shall report to the agency head, in such form as he may direct, the condition of the agency account standing on their books. The head of the agency shall see to it that a reconciliation is made between the balance shown in the reports and the balance found in the books of the agency.”



Section 5, Chapter 21 of the GAM for NGAs, Volume I provides that: “The Chief Accountant/Designated Staff shall within ten days from receipt of the monthly Bank Statement (BS) together with the paid checks, original copies of Debit Memoranda (DM)/Credit Memoranda (CM) from the GSB, reconcile the BS with the GL and prepare the BRS in four copies”



Section 7, Chapter 21 of the same Manual also states that the Chief Accountant shall submit the BRS within twenty days after receipt of the monthly BS to the following:



Original	-	COA Auditor (with all the supporting documents and JEVs)

Copy 2		-	Head of Agency/ Entity 

Copy 3		-	Accounting Division/Unit file

Copy 4		-	Bank, if necessary



Review of the Post-Closing Trial Balance of the College as of December 31, 2020 showed total Cash in Bank balance of ₱215.74 million composed of five Local Currency, Current Accounts (LCCA) and one Local Currency, Savings Account (LCSA). However, confirmation with the Government Servicing Bank (GSB) disclosed only five LCCA accounts with total account balance of ₱300.10 million.  Analysis of the confirmed bank balances as of December 31, 2020 revealed a significant variance of ₱84.36 million between the book and bank records as follows:



Account Number

Balance per Post Closing TB (₱)

Balance per Bank Confirmation (₱)

Variance (₱)

Remarks

LBP, LCCA No. 1

215,718,214.15

  216,088,637.74 

84,379,922.01

No BRS and SLs as of December 2020

LBP, LCCA No. 2



    66,944,069.99 





LBP, LCCA No. 3



    11,192,111.12 





LBP, LCCA No. 4



      5,788,572.66 





LBP, LCCA No. 5



           84,744.65 





LBP, LCSA 

        24,549.50 

0.00

-24,549.50



Total

215,742,763.65

300,098,136.16

84,355,372.51

 

 

As shown in the table, total balances of five LCCA bank accounts maintained in the Land bank of the Philippines (LBP) had discrepancies with the reported balances in the financial statements. Further verification of records was hampered due to the absence of BRS as of December 31, 2020.  In addition, the Accounting Unit was also unable to update the SLs for each bank account. 



On the other hand, LBP LCSA account with a book balance of ₱24,550 per financial statements was not reflected in the bank confirmation, therefore casting doubt as to its existence. Interview with the Accountant disclosed that the LCSA account was just a forwarded balance from previous years and admitted that this account may already been closed. However, they were not able to properly adjust in the books since documents are still to be retrieved.  Prior years’ audited financial statements showed that the book balance remained the same since December 31, 2018.



The non-preparation of the required monthly BRS and the delay in the submission of the same to the Office of the Auditor has deprived the latter of the timely review and verification thereof and consequently, the early communication of the results to Management. Further, the unreconciled differences between the book and bank records as well as the balances between the SLs and the reported Cash in Bank balances in the financial statements casted doubt on the accuracy thereof in the financial statements. 



We recommended that Management firmly instruct the College Accountant to religiously prepare and submit the required monthly BRS for all the bank accounts of the College in accordance with the afore-mentioned rules and regulations and to maintain updated SLs with balances as reconciled with the general ledger and financial statements.



Management Comment:



			The Accounting Unit replied that the variance between the book and bank balance could have been brought about by a ₱51.95 million fund downloaded by the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) Unifast on December 04, 2020 but was only receipted by the Cashier's Office on January 05, 2021, thus, not included in the report of collections for December 2020. They also added that the variance may also account for outstanding checks already recorded as paid in the books not yet presented to the bank for payment, but was not supported with specific details due to their inability to prepare BRS since year 2019. While the Accounting Head attributed the non-preparation of BRS and non-updating of SLs of cash accounts to the lack of manpower, the President assured that the issue on manpower shall be given attention to fully comply with the recommendations within the year.

	Cash Advances

	

8)	Cash advances were granted to SDO despite non-liquidation of previous cash advances. 



Section 89 of PD No. 1445 and Section 4.1.2 of COA Circular No. 97-002 both provides that no additional cash advance shall be allowed to any official or employee unless the previous cash advance given to him is first settled or a proper accounting thereof is made. 

	

In addition, Section 5 of COA Circular No. 2012-004 provides that Article 217 of the Revised Penal Code states in unequivocal terms that: "The failure of a public officer to have duly forthcoming any public funds or property with which he is chargeable, upon demand by any duly authorized officer, shall be prima facie evidence that he has put such missing funds or property to personal use."



Analysis of the schedule of cash advances and liquidations during the year showed that a cash advance was granted to the SSC Main Campus Administrator on December 7, 2020 amounting to ₱205,450 despite non-liquidation of her previous cash advance last April 22, 2020 amounting to ₱173,995.  This condition is evident in the aging of unliquidated cash advances as of December 31, 2020 which showed both cash advances as still outstanding. 



The same is also evident with the situation of Bulan Campus Cashier who was granted a special cash advance amounting to ₱143,240 on December 7, 2020 when her previous cash advance for payroll in the amount of ₱47,500 dated December 2, 2020 remained unliquidated. Both cash advances where partially liquidated as at year-end and showed unliquidated balances of ₱7,498 and ₱7,500, respectively.



Disbursement vouchers (DVs) for all of the above cash advances bear a certification, issued by the Accounting Unit, that the concerned AOs have no unsettled cash advances as of the date of grant of new cash advance. The certification was made in compliance with the prescribed documentary requirements for common government transactions, to facilitate the processing of the cash advance. The issuance of said certification is considered futile and questionable because cash advance monitoring reports prepared by the same Office, showed unliquidated balances prior to release of the new cash advance. 



The practice of granting cash advances despite non-liquidation of previous cash advances is not a sound cash management practice and exposes government funds to possible risk of loss and/or misuse. 



We recommended and Management agreed to instruct the Accounting Unit to strictly enforce the rules and regulations on the granting, utilization and liquidation of cash advances in accordance with COA Circular No.  97-002 and refrain from granting additional cash advances unless previous cash advances are fully liquidated and refunded.

9)	Cash advances were not liquidated within the prescribed period resulting in an unliquidated balance of ₱0.55 million as of December 31, 2020. 



Section 89 of PD No. 1445 states that “no cash advance shall be given unless for a legally authorized specific purpose. A cash advance shall be reported on and liquidated as soon as the purpose for which it was given has been served. Xxx”



Likewise, Item 5.1 of COA Circular No. 97-002 provides that the AO shall liquidate his cash advance as follows:



5.1.1	Salaries, wages, etc. - within five (5) days after each fifteen (15) day/end of the month pay period.

5.1.2	Petty Operating Expenses and Field Operating Expenses - within twenty (20) days after the end of the year; subject to replenishment as frequently as necessary during the year.

5.1.3	Official Travel – within sixty (60) days after return to the Philippines in the case of foreign travel or within thirty (30) days after return to his permanent official station in the case of local travel 



Also, COA Circular No. 2012-004 states that cash advances must, as a rule, be liquidated within the prescribed period depending upon the nature and purpose of the cash advance (e.g., for salaries and wages, petty and field operating expenses, local travel and foreign travel). Included among operating expenses are cash advances for the payment of honoraria and similar payments to officials and employees, operating expenditures for special projects and activities like anniversary celebration, and special purpose and time bound activity like cultural and athletic activities. These must be liquidated within twenty (20) days from accomplishment of the purpose.



The schedule of cash advances and liquidations during the year showed that majority of the AOs of the College were unable to liquidate their cash advances within the prescribed period, as summarized below:



Account

Total No. of CA

No. of CA Unliquidated as of year-end

CA Liquidated within

CA Liquidated beyond

Average period of Liquidation

Longest period of Liquidation

Advances for Payroll

358

2

31

325

15.97

145

Advances to Special Disbursing Officers

38

6

9

23

93.87

467

Advances to Officers and Employees

48

1

5

42

98.95

350



Although our analysis of the grants and liquidation of cash advances during the year showed an encouraging liquidation efficiency signifying Management’s determination to adhere strictly to rules and regulations concerning settlement of cash advances and other collectibles, it still disclosed an unliquidated amount of ₱0.55 million as of December 31, 2020. As illustrated below, out of the total cash advances of ₱42.35 million composed of those granted during the year amounting to ₱41.27 million and unliquidated balances carried over from the previous year of ₱1.08 million, the sum of ₱41.80 million was liquidated and settled in CY 2020 leaving an unliquidated balance of ₱0.55 million.



Account

Beg. Balance 01/01/2020

Grants

Liquidations

Balance, End 12/31/2020

Advances for Payroll

₱   276,234.96 

₱ 38,877,933.90 

₱ 39,113,218.86 

  ₱   40,950.00 

Advances to SDO

     497,770.00 

2,177,277.50 

  2,168,303.10 

  506,744.40 

Advances to Officers and Employees

  303,136.30 

    218,662.00 

521,198.31 

         599.99 

TOTAL

₱1,077,141.26 

₱ 41,273,873.40 

  ₱41,802,720.27 

₱ 548,294.39 



Aging of the unliquidated cash advances also showed that all of the nine outstanding cash advances totalling ₱0.55 million as of December 31, 2020 are current and aged below one year.



As soon as the purpose for which the cash advance was granted has been served, the cash advance should be reported or properly liquidated. There is no more reason for the AO to still keep the unspent balances as these amounts could not be used for other purposes. The holding of such amounts for extended period will only expose government funds to unnecessary risks of loss or misuse. It may also confuse the AO considering that one AO holds various funds under their custody and the possibility that such excess money may be mixed with their personal monies.



The Audit Team also noted that some cash advances were liquidated partially in documents and later on fully settled by a refund of cash. A cash advance is settled and liquidated either by returning the money advanced if unspent, or by the presentation of regularly accomplished vouchers, giving satisfactory detail of the items thereon paid which must be in accordance with the purpose for which the cash advance was granted, and further supported by proper receipts and other evidence of payment, subject to the result of the post-audit thereof by the Auditor concerned. The partial liquidation of cash advance indicates that the cash advance granted was more than what is needed in the activities/project and may also result in use of government funds for other activities not related to the project. Cash advance no longer needed must be returned or refunded immediately to prevent misuse or personal borrowing of idle cash.

The afore-mentioned practice contravenes with the rules and regulations on the granting, utilization, and liquidation of cash advances and exposes the government funds to possible risk of loss and/or misuse. 

 

We recommended and Management agreed to remind the AOs to immediately liquidate their cash advances as soon as the purpose for which they were granted has been served. 







Inventories



The accuracy, reliability and existence of various Inventory accounts with aggregate balance of ₱12.36 million as of year-end cannot be ascertained due to the following:



10)	Discrepancies amounting to ₱1.95 million between the balances of Inventory Held for Consumption accounts in the Financial Statement (FS) as compared to the Supplies Ledger Cards (SLCs) and non-preparation of SLCs for semi-expendable property accounts with an aggregate balance of ₱3.42 million.



Section 111 of the PD No. 1445 in keeping of accounts provides: (1) The accounts of an agency shall be kept in such detail as is necessary to meet the needs of the agency and at the same time be adequate to furnish the information needed by fiscal or control agencies of the government, and (2) The highest standards of honesty, objectivity and consistency shall be observed in the keeping of accounts to safeguard against inaccurate or misleading information. 



Section 17, Chapter 8, Volume I of the GAM for NGAs provides the Records, Forms and Reports to be prepared and/or maintained pertaining to Inventories are, among others, as follows:



--	Stock Card (SC) (Appendix 58) – shall be used to record all receipts and issues of supplies and the balance in quantity at any time. It shall be maintained by the Property and/or Supply Division/Unit for each item in stock. The IAR, RIS, PO and DR serve as the original sources of information for making entries on the card.



--	Supplies Ledger Card (SLC) (Appendix 57) – shall be used to record materials received, issued and the balance both in quantity and amount at any time. It shall be maintained by the Accounting Division/Unit for each kind of supplies and materials. The IAR, RIS, RSMI, PO and DR serve as the original sources of information for making entries on the card.



--	Requisition and Issue Slip (RIS) (Appendix 63) – shall be used by the end-user to request issue of supplies and materials that are carried on stock. It is also used by the Property and/or Supply Division/Unit to indicate availability or non-availability of items requisitioned and/or to record issues of item/s requisitioned.



--	Report of Supplies and Materials Issued (RSMI) (Appendix 64) – shall be prepared by the Property and/or Supply Custodian based on the RIS and shall be used by the Accounting Division/Unit as basis in preparing the JEV to record the supplies and materials issued.



--	Report on the Physical Count of Inventories (RPCI) (Appendix 66) – shall be used to report the physical count of supplies by type of inventory as at a given date. It shows the balance of inventory items per card and per count and shortage/overage, if any. These include the semi-expendable property wherein the issue is covered by ICS. (emphasis supplied)



--	Inventory Custodian Slip (ICS) (Appendix 59) – shall be prepared upon issue of semi-expendable property covered by approved RIS.



Moreover, instructions provided in Appendices 57, 58, 64 and 66, Volume II of the GAM for NGAs states that the balance per SC shall be reconciled regularly with the SLCs and controlling accounts maintained by the Accounting Division/Unit. Any discrepancies shall be immediately verified and adjusted. Also, the Agency shall conduct physical count of inventories every semester and shall be reported thru the RPCI. The RPCI shall be reconciled with the SLCs and SCs maintained by the Accounting Division/Unit, and Property and/or Supply Division/Unit, respectively. Any discrepancy shall also be verified and /or adjusted accordingly. 



On the other hand, the RSMIs prepared by the Supply and/or Property Unit shall be consolidated by the Accounting Division, by accomplishing the unit cost and total amount using weighted average method or specific identification of costs method, for the preparation of the JEV, at the end of each month. The Accounting Division and Supply and/or Property Unit shall conduct periodic reconciliation of the SLC and SC to identify and adjust any discrepancy.



As of December 31, 2020, the detailed Statement of Financial Position of the College showed the following balances of inventory accounts:



Accounts

Balance (₱)

Inventory Held for Consumption



Office Supplies Inventories

   3,227,488.31

Accountable Forms, Plates and Stickers Inventory

82,200.00

Drugs and Medicines Inventory

33,920.00

Agricultural and Marine Supplies Inventory

254,682.70

Textbooks and Instructional Materials Inventory

290,533.00

Other Supplies and Materials Inventory

5,054,833.58

Total Inventories Held for Consumption

     8,943,657.59

Semi-Expendable Machinery and Equipment



Semi-Expendable Office Equipment

165,264.70

Semi-Expendable Information and Communications Technology Equipment

238,205.00

Semi-Expendable Communication Equipment

223,473.18

Semi-Expendable Medical Equipment

23,800.00

Semi-Expendable Sports Equipment

24,569.50

Semi-Expendable Other Machinery and Equipment

1,318,870.00

Total Semi-Expendable Machinery and Equipment

    1,994,182.38

Semi-Expendable Furniture, Fixtures and Books



Semi-Expendable Furniture and Fixtures

862,998.50

Semi-Expendable Books

559,169.04

Total Semi-Expendable Furniture, Fixtures and Books

  1,422,167.54

Total Inventories

   12,360,007.51



Comparison of balances of Inventory Held for Consumption accounts as reported in the FS vis-à-vis balances per SLCs, wherein both reports are being maintained by the Accounting Unit and are supposed to be always reconciled, showed discrepancies amounting to ₱1.95 million as detailed in the following table:



Inventory Account Title

Total Cost per FS

 (₱)

 Total Cost per SLCs

(₱)  

Difference 



(₱)









Inventory Held for Consumption







Office Supplies Inventories

3,227,488.31

4,642,049.69

(1,414,561.38)

Accountable Forms, Plates and Stickers Inventory

82,200.00

82,200.00

0.00

Drugs and Medicines Inventory

33,920.00

33,920.00

0.00

Agricultural and Marine Supplies Inventory

254,682.70

29,082.72

225,599.98

Textbooks and Instructional Materials Inventory

290,533.00

1,435,581.61

(1,145,048.61)

Other Supplies and Materials Inventory

5,054,833.58

774,398.65

4,280,434.93

Total

8,943,657.59

6,997,232.67

1,946,424.92



The difference in balances between these two reports, both prepared by the Accounting Office represents unaccounted inventory items that are doubtful as to its existence at year-end. Perusal of SLCs indicated that discrepancies were caused by inaccurate entries and non-updating of the SLCs by the Accounting Office. Moreover, verification with the RSMI submitted by the Supply Officers of the four campuses revealed that some SLCs reported ending balances of inventory accounts that were already reflected as issued items in the RSMIs, thus, connotes issuance of inventories that were not correspondingly reflected in the SLC. Based on the available RSMIs submitted, inventories amounting to ₱201,896 and ₱203,452 for Bulan and Castilla Campuses, respectively, were still reflected as ending balances in the SLC but were already reported as issued in the RSMI. It was also observed that there were some RIS numbers recorded in the reference column in the SLCs for specific inventory items that were not included in the RSMI prepared by the Supply Officer, which connotes either incomplete preparation of RSMI or inaccurate recording in the SLCs. 



Further scrutiny of the RSMIs prepared by the campuses showed that the form was accomplished entirely by the concerned Supply Officers, even for the cost portion to be filled out supposedly by the Accounting Office, contrary to the cited instructions, thus, rendered the conformity with the application of weighted average method or specific identification of costs method of costing for inventory issuances, doubtful. Nevertheless, interview with the Accounting staff disclosed that, regardless of the costs indicated in the RSMI by the Supply/Property Officers, the weighted average method of costing issuances of inventories was dutifully observed since they actually used the RIS attached to the paid DVs as basis in updating SLCs and recording issuances of inventories.  However, the RSMIs reported some RIS Nos. that were not recorded in the SLCs. This practice is not consistent with the aforementioned regulations and resulted in unreconciled entries in the SLC as against the RSMI prepared by the Supply Officer and possible misstatements in the inventory accounts. 



For the semi-expendable inventories totalling ₱3.42 million, a comparison between the Accounting Unit records against the Supply Unit records cannot be made since SLCs and RPCI were not maintained and submitted. The Accounting Unit was only able to present a list of all the acquired semi-expendable properties, including those from previous years without any remarks if those properties were already issued or still on hand, as well as the current end-users of the items which shall be supported with duly accomplished Inventory Custodian Slip to pinpoint accountability. Also, the RPCI submitted by the Supply/Property Officers did not include semi-expendable properties considered as inventories at year-end, thus, the existence and accuracy of semi-expendable inventory items cannot be determined based on the said list.



The differences between the Accounting records and the absence of SLCs for semi-expendable inventories indicates a weak inventory accounting system which casts doubt as to the accuracy and reliability of reported Inventory account balances as of December 31, 2020.



We recommended that Management require the Accounting Office to maintain updated and complete Supplies Ledger Cards for all the Inventory accounts including semi-expendable properties, which shall be reconciled with the controlling accounts in the financial statements and other reports within the Accounting Office.



Management Comment:



During the exit conference, the Accounting Office remarked that though the cost portion of the RSMIs submitted to their Office were initially filled-up by the Supply Officers, the costs indicated were still duly validated to ensure that the weighted average cost method is used. Nonetheless, they concurred with the recommendations and assured that they will update and maintain complete SLCs for all Inventory accounts including semi-expendable properties.





11)	Incomplete preparation of the RPCI and Stock Cards (SCs) of the Supply Officer.



Section 13, Chapter 8 of GAM for NGAs cites that physical count or inventory, which is required semi-annually, is an indispensable procedure for checking the integrity of property custodianship. The results of the physical count shall be reported in the RPCI, as at a given date. However, the integrity of custodianship of the College’s properties cannot be established due to non-preparation of the RPCI and non-presentation of the corresponding SCs for Bulan and Magallanes Campuses. 



During the audit, only the Main and Castilla Campuses were able to submit their RPCIs.  However, review of the submitted RPCIs of the Main and Castilla Campuses showed various deficiencies, as summarized below:



RPCI Particulars

Main Campus

Castilla Campus

Type of Inventory Item

The report only includes Office Supplies Inventory 

a)	The report only includes Other Supplies and Material Inventory 

 

 

b)	Semi-Expendable properties already issued to end-users were included in the Property Inventory Form together with Property, Plant and Equipment Accounts

Fund Cluster

Not reported by fund cluster

Not reported by fund cluster

Stock Number

Stock numbers not assigned to each item of inventory

Stock numbers not assigned to each item of inventory

Unit Value

No unit value

 With Unit Value

Balance per card/sheet

No balances per card

Balances per card were consistently similar with the actual count. But Stock Cards were not presented for validation.



It can be observed that the RPCIs submitted by the Main and Castilla Campuses were not properly accomplished, and lacking in details, hence, the total cost of inventories in the RPCI cannot be determined and reconciled with the Accounting records. 

	

Further verification of the quantities for the available inventory items reported in the RPCI against the SCs for the Main Campus revealed material differences against the balances in the SCs and the actual count as presented in the RPCI. There are inventory items included in the RPCI that are not supported with SCs, and vice versa, there are SCs for inventory items with balances that are not included in the RPCI. These variances greatly connote non-updating of SCs and non-reconciliation thereof with the RPCIs, as well as the SLCs maintained by Accounting Office. These differences should be reflected in the “Shortage/Overage” and “Remarks” column of the RPCI and shall be verified/adjusted accordingly. However, due to the inaccurate preparation of RPCI and SCs, variances were overlooked, thus, actual existence of the inventory ending balances cannot be determined. 



Moreover, aside from the conditions discussed above, there was difficulty in comparing the reported balances of inventory items in the RPCI and SCs with SLCs due to varying descriptions of the item, unit of measurement used and the non-assignment of stock numbers in the RPCI and SC. Evidently, this is a result of the non-reconciliation between the Accounting Unit and Supply/Property Unit records.



The non-submission of properly accomplished RPCIs, non-preparation of updated SCs for all type of inventory accounts of the four campuses of the College and the non-reconciliation between the said reports maintained by the Supply/Property Unit, cast doubt on the accuracy, reliability, and existence of the reported balances of Inventory accounts. 



We recommended and Management agreed to strictly require the Supply Officers of all Campuses to:



a)	Maintain updated and complete SCs for all the Inventory accounts, including semi-expendable properties;

 

b)	Conduct physical inventory-taking for the inventory items of the respective campuses every semester and prepare/submit the RPCI in the prescribed form as provided in the GAM for NGAs, Volume II;



c)	Strictly follow the instructions provided in the GAM for NGAs, Volume II, in preparing and accomplishing the RSMI and regularly submit the complete RSMI supported with the corresponding RIS and to the Accounting Office, for proper costs computation and report consolidation; and



d)	Undertake immediate reconciliation of records with the Accounting Office to account for the differences and make the necessary adjustments to come up with correct and reconciled balances.





12)	Accountable forms with total cost of ₱75,000 were recorded and recognized as Inventory although not yet delivered and received by the Agency as of year-end. 



Paragraph 7 of International Public Sector Accounting Standard (IPSAS) 1, Presentation of Financial Statements, provides that: 



Accrual basis means a basis of accounting under which transactions and other events are recognized when they occur (and not only when cash or its equivalent is received or paid). Therefore, the transactions and events are recorded in the accounting records and recognized in the financial statements of the periods to which they relate. The elements recognized under accrual accounting are assets, liabilities, net assets/equity, revenue, and expenses. 



Assets are resources controlled by an entity as a result of past events and from which future economic benefits or service potential are expected to flow to the entity.



In addition, Chapter 8 of GAM for NGAs, Volume I, provides the procedures and documents needed to initiate the recording of inventories which includes, among others, the Inspection and Acceptance Report (IAR) and Delivery Receipt (DR), to be used by the Accounting Unit as basis for recording the received/accepted goods.



Review of the SLCs for Accountable Forms Inventory revealed that 750 pads of AF No. 51-C (Official Receipts) with total cost of ₱75,000 were recognized as Inventory on November 25, 2020 upon the preparation of the DV and check for payment to the National Printing Office. These forms were also recorded as received in its corresponding SLC.



However, validation with the submitted RAAF for the month of December 2020 prepared by the Supply/Property Officer of the Main Campus, proved otherwise since no balance on hand for AF No. 51-C was reflected. Further verification also showed that the said AFs were actually delivered to SSC on January 19, 2021 as evidenced by DR No. 006798. These forms were inspected and accepted by the Supply Officer on February 08, 2021. 



Inclusion of these forms as Inventory as at year-end, before the actual receipt and acceptance of the goods is contrary to the above-cited rules on the recognition of assets, which requires that transactions shall be recorded in the accounting records and recognized in the financial statements on the periods on which they occur. 

 

The recognition of Inventories without basis of actual receipt and ownership of goods is not a sound practice, thus, overstated the Inventory account and affected the fair presentation of the financial statements as of December 31, 2020. 



We recommended that Management require the Accounting Office, and they agreed to refrain from recognizing Inventories prior to the actual receipt of goods and without complete supporting documents as enumerated in the GAM for NGAs, Volume I.





Property, Plant and Equipment



The existence, accuracy and reliability of PPE accounts carried in the books at ₱509.57 million (excluding Land and Construction in Progress) could not be determined and ascertained due to the following:



13)	Unreconciled variance of ₱33.80 million between the balance in the FS and Property Inventory Report.



Section 42, Chapter 10 of the GAM for NGAs, Volume I, provides the Accounting and Property Records to be maintained for PPE. The Chief Accountant shall maintain the Property, Plant and Equipment Ledger Card (PPELC) for each category of PPE including work and other animals, livestock etc. The PPELC shall be kept to record promptly the acquisition, description, custody, estimated useful life, depreciation, impairment loss, disposal and other information about the asset. For check and balance, the Property and Supply Office/Unit shall likewise maintain Property Card (PC) for PPE in their custody to account for the receipt and disposition of the same. The balance per PC shall be reconciled with PPELC maintained by the Accounting Division/Unit. They shall also be reconciled with other property records like PAR.



Appendix 69, Volume II of the same Manual states that the report on the physical count of the PPE shall be reconciled with the PCs every year and any discrepancies should be immediately verified and adjusted. (emphasis supplied)



On the other hand, Appendix 70 also provides that PPELC shall be reconciled with the report on the physical count of the PPE, PC and the control accounts. Any discrepancies shall be immediately verified and adjusted. (emphasis supplied)



Regular reconciliation between accounting and property records allows the monitoring and testing of the operation of controls and helps detect shortages, losses and identify errors in recording. It allows prompt correction and adjustment of errors and establish responsibility and accountability for the property.

	

Verification of records disclosed that the PPE account with total acquisition cost of ₱763.22 million (excluding Land and Construction in Progress accounts) did not reconcile with the balance per Property Inventory Report amounting to ₱729.42 million or a difference of ₱33.80 million. Details are as follows:



Account Title

Total Cost Per FS (₱)

Total Cost per Property Inventory Report (₱)

Difference

(₱)

Land Improvement 

      44,786,111.97 

      33,564,297.03 

    11,221,814.94 

Infrastructure Assets

      22,275,572.69 

      22,125,148.65 

         150,424.04 

Building and Other Structures

   518,773,098.33 

    507,930,643.05 

    10,842,455.28 

Machinery and Equipment

   115,697,467.36 

    106,830,778.44 

      8,866,688.92 

Transportation Equipment

      12,391,760.00 

      12,491,290.00 

          (99,530.00)

Furniture, Fixtures and Books

        8,258,044.82 

         6,060,857.83 

      2,197,186.99 

Other PPE

      41,040,035.82 

      40,417,551.44 

         622,484.38 

Total Cost

   763,222,090.99 

    729,420,566.44 

    33,801,524.55 



Further examination of financial reports showed variances between the balances in the FS and the total balances of PPELC amounting to ₱12.39 million, both of which are records/reports maintained by the Accounting Unit. Comparison of balances is shown as follows:



Account Title

Total Cost Per FS(₱)

Total Cost per PPELC(₱)

Difference

(₱)

Land Improvement 

      44,786,111.97 

      44,100,449.06 

        685,662.91 

Infrastructure Assets

      22,275,572.69 

      22,275,572.69 

                       0.00   

Building and Other Structures

   518,773,098.33 

    518,571,501.78 

        201,596.55 

Machinery and Equipment

   115,697,467.36 

    109,991,691.50 

     5,705,775.86 

Transportation Equipment

      12,391,760.00 

      12,430,658.00 

        (38,898.00)

Furniture, Fixtures and Books

        8,258,044.82 

        5,747,014.36 

     2,511,030.46 

Other PPE

      41,040,035.82 

      37,717,595.24 

     3,322,440.58 

Total Cost

   763,222,090.99 

    750,834,482.63 

  12,387,608.36 



As can be gleaned from the preceding table, since both records are being maintained by the Accounting Unit, the variance between them indicates unaccounted properties significantly amounting to ₱12.39 million.  



During the audit, the Property Unit was able to present property cards (PC) for the Land Improvements and Buildings and Other Structures accounts and for some equipment purchased in the current year only.  Since PCs are incomplete, comparison can only be made between the Property Inventory Report of the Property Unit and the PPELC maintained by the Accounting Unit that showed a substantial variance of ₱21.41 million which may also represent unrecorded, unlocated or lost properties.



Account Title

Total Cost per PPELC (₱)

Total Cost per Property Inventory Report (₱)

Difference

(₱)

Land Improvement 

        44,100,449.06 

     33,564,297.03 

    10,536,152.03 

Infrastructure Assets

        22,275,572.69 

     22,125,148.65 

         150,424.04 

Building and Other Structures

      518,571,501.78 

  507,930,643.05 

    10,640,858.73 

Machinery and Equipment

      109,991,691.50 

  106,830,778.44 

      3,160,913.06 

Transportation Equipment

        12,430,658.00 

     12,491,290.00 

          (60,632.00)

Furniture, Fixtures and Books

          5,747,014.36 

       6,060,857.83 

       (313,843.47)

Other PPE

        37,717,595.24 

     40,417,551.44 

    (2,699,956.20)

Total Cost

      750,834,482.63 

  729,420,566.44 

    21,413,916.19 



Overall, the total unreconciled variance of ₱33.80 million comprises the following:



Difference between FS and PPELC (within Accounting records)

 ₱ 12,387,608.36 

Difference between Property Inventory and PPELC



  21,413,916.19 

Total Difference between Accounting and Property Units

 ₱ 33,801,524.55 



The substantial variances between the three records as presented above clearly indicates a very weak property accounting system. Similar audit observations were already discussed in previous years’ audit reports, but appropriate actions were not taken to correct the said deficiencies. The Accounting and Property Units were still not able to regularly reconcile their records to determine whether existing assets reconcile with the recorded accountability, and if any discrepancy should be found, proper investigation shall be conducted and correction of records shall be made, if necessary. Hence, such inability certainly affected the proper accounting and valuation of the assets of the College.



The non-reconciliation between the Accounting and Property Office records resulted in unreconciled balances of PPE accounts amounting to ₱33.80 million, contrary to the afore-cited rules and regulations, thus, the existence, accuracy and reliability of the reported PPE accounts as of December 31, 2020 could not be ascertained.



We recommended that Management take the following courses of actions:



a)	Require the Property Unit to maintain updated and complete Property Cards for each class of PPE and shall be reconciled with the Report on the Physical Count of Property, Plant and Equipment (RPCPPE) every year;



b)	Require the Accounting Unit to review and update the PPELCs which shall be reconciled with the control accounts as reported in the FS; and



c)	Strictly require and prioritize the reconciliation between the Accounting and Property Units records to ensure that all discrepancies are immediately investigated, cleared and reconciled with the books of accounts. Henceforth, ensure periodic reconciliation of balances between PPELCs against its control accounts and Property Cards.



Management Comment:



During the exit conference, the Accounting and Property Units both agreed and assured that they will prioritize the reconciliation between their records by designating specific personnel from their Offices who will devote their time in the conduct of such.

   



1)	The required annual physical inventory count was not conducted due to the non-creation of an Inventory Committee, thus, corresponding RPCPPE was not prepared.



COA Circular No. 80-124 dated January 18, 1980 states that the physical inventory-taking being an indispensable procedure for checking the integrity of property custodianship, has to be regularly enforced. Thus, the Circular requires that physical inventory of fixed assets shall be made at least once a year as of December 31 in accordance with the guidelines enumerated in the said Circular.



The head of the agency shall exercise the diligence of a good father of a family in supervising accountable officers under his control to prevent the incurrence of loss of government property, otherwise he shall be jointly and solidarily liable with persons primarily accountable therefor.



In addition, Section V of the same Circular also provides that a committee shall be formed to take charge of the physical inventory-taking, consisting of two or more employees designated by the head of the agency including the property/administrative officer or custodian depending on the extent of his accountability.  A representative of the Auditor shall witness the inventory-taking.



Section 42.g, Chapter 10 of GAM for NGAs, Volume I, on Accounting and Property Records to be maintained for PPE likewise states that the Report on the Physical Count of Property, Plant and Equipment (RPCPPE) shall be used to report the physical count and condition of PPE by type as at a given date, including those which are unrecorded and those which could not be accounted for. It shows the balance of PPE per property cards and per count and the shortage/overage, if any. It shall be rendered by the Inventory Committee on its yearly physical count of properties owned by the entity.



Further, Appendix 73 of the same Manual provides that the RPCPPE shall be certified correct by the Inventory Committee Chair and Members, approved by the Head of Agency/Entity and verified by the COA Representative. The form shall be submitted to the Auditor concerned and Accounting Division/Unit not later than January 31 of each year.



Perusal of reports for PPE revealed that the Property Officers from each campus, prepared and submitted a Property Inventory Report as of December 31, 2020, but were not able to conduct an actual physical inventory-taking or count for two consecutive years already. Inquiry with the Head of the Property Unit in the Main Campus reasoned that the inability to conduct a physical inventory count of the College’s properties was due to the unavailability of the former Auditor. However, the Property Unit was not able to provide proof of receipt of communication, or any notice/invitation sent to the Office of the Auditor to convey said activity.



We would like to emphasize that the COA Auditor is not a part of the Inventory Committee to be designated by the head of the agency. Inventory reports and other results of the physical inventory count shall be furnished to the COA Auditor for appropriate post-audit action. The COA Auditor or an authorized representative may also witness the physical count activities but his/her presence or absence should not be a constraint for the Inventory Committee to proceed with the said action. 



Due to the absence of an actual physical inventory-taking, corresponding RPCPPEs were also not prepared. Review of the submitted reports covering prior years also showed that the Property Unit only prepared RPCPPEs for properties that were acquired during the year, therefore does not reflect the actual inventory of properties owned by the entity and defeats the purpose of the Report.  

	

The absence of a designated Inventory Committee, the non-conduct of physical inventory-taking and non-preparation of RPCPPE manifest poor property management and accounting systems and cast doubt on the existence and completeness of PPE accounts as of December 31, 2020.



We recommended and Management concurred to create an Inventory Committee to conduct the annual physical inventory-taking to facilitate the validation of existence, condition and status of all properties of the College and eventually, the preparation of a complete RPCPPE. 





2)	Property Acknowledgement Receipts (PARs) were not duly signed by end-users and lacking in details, such as property numbers, date acquired and costs.



Section 42.f, Chapter 10 of GAM for NGAs, Volume I, on Accounting and Property Records to be maintained for PPE provides that PAR shall be used by the Supply and/or Property Division/Unit to report the issuance of PPE and the acknowledgement of the end-user.



Additionally, Appendix 71 of the same Manual states that the PAR shall be renewed every three years or every time there is a change in custodianship/user of the property. The recipient or end user of the property shall acknowledge receipt of the property by signing the “Received by” portion and also indicate the date of receipt of the property. The designated Supply and/or Property Custodian shall sign the “Issued by” portion and indicate the date of issue of the property.



Examination of copies of PARs submitted to the Auditor showed that only 12 out of the total of 95 PARs were duly signed by the end-user. Further inspection also revealed that the forms are lacking in details, such as fund cluster, property numbers and date acquired while some does not even have costs or amounts. The said PARs were also not assigned with serial numbers for control purposes. 



The inability to maintain updated and completely accomplished PARs duly signed by the current end-users made it difficult to establish actual custodianship and accountability for properties and provided opportunity for loss or possible misuse of government assets.



We recommended and Management assured to strictly require the Property Officers of all Campuses to maintain updated and properly accomplished PARs duly signed/received by the end-users to accurately establish custodianship and accountability for the properties.





3)	Delivery of two units of printers with total purchase price of ₱96,235 procured by SSC for its Crabmeat Processing Facility in Magallanes Campus was received and accepted by the Inspection Officer despite their non-conformity with the standards and specifications provided in the contract.



Section 19, Chapter 10 of the GAM for NGAs, Volume I, on the Receipt, Inspection and Acceptance of PPE states that:



Receipt of items purchased by the agency/entity shall be inspected by the inspection officer/committee before acceptance by the Supply and/or Property Custodian. Acceptance shall be made only if the PPE delivered conform to the standards and specifications in the PO. Inspection and acceptance shall be made using the IAR.



In CY 2019, the College was a recipient of a ₱15 million grant from the Department of Science and Technology (DOST) as counterpart funds for the implementation of the Crabmeat Processing and Canning Facility Project at Magallanes Campus. Consequently, the College procured various crab meat processing equipment during the same year with total contract price of ₱14.87 million, including delivery and installation costs. These were delivered and accepted by the College in February 2020 as confirmed by an IAR signed by the Inspection Committee.  



Due to the mechanical and technical nature of the equipment and their components, the Auditor requested for assistance from the COA Regional Technical Services Office to conduct a technical review of the project. Prior to the request for technical evaluation, the Auditor visited the site and conducted an ocular inspection of the delivered items on December 15, 2020. The ocular inspection revealed that majority of the equipment are not yet installed while some are yet to be unboxed. We have also noted that two units of printers with total purchase price of ₱96,235 were accepted by the Inspection Committee despite its non-conformity with the standards and specifications provided in the contract. Validation of the contract and its supplemental agreement showed the specifications for the procured printers as follows:

  



Item Description per Contract and Technical Specifications

Contract Cost

1.

Label Printer, inkjet, high speed color printer, print width: 4.25”, full color printing (CMYK), with 4 separate color cartridge

₱   41,235.00

2. 

Color Label Printer, print width: up to 8.5”, with built-in cutter, full color printing (CMYK), with 4 separate color cartridge

55,000.00



Total Cost

₱   96,235.00



Examination of the actual printers accepted revealed that these were inferior models and do not support the functions of the requested printers as detailed above. Description of the actual items delivered and accepted by the inspection committee are presented on the table below:  





Actual Items, Specifications and Model as delivered and accepted

Prevailing Market Price

1.

Two (2) units Epson L120 Ink Tank Printer, Model No. C11CD76403

₱    9,990.00 

(at ₱4,995.00 each based on official brand website)

2. 

One (1) unit Quaff Brand, Paper Cutter, cuts up to A4 size

935.00

(regular price based on leading online shopping platform)



TOTAL PREVAILING MARKET PRICE

₱   10,925.00



Photos of the actual items taken during the ocular inspection are presented in Annex A.  Further, research also showed that specifications of the actual items accepted by the Agency differed from what is specified in the contract and that the prevailing market prices of these items are far below than the contract cost.

The said items together with all other components that were included in the total contract price of ₱14.87 million, are already paid on July 3, 2020, with a corresponding ten per cent retention money due for release after the complete installation and final acceptance of the project. According to the Business Affairs Coordinator of Magallanes Campus, they have already communicated the deficiency with the Supplier and they are still waiting for their response. Nevertheless, the acceptance and usage of substandard printers may pose possible issues on their functions and ability to meet the outputs as expected from the standard equipment which may eventually affect the achievement of the objectives of the project.   



The receipt and acceptance of items procured by the Agency despite their non-conformity with the standards and specifications provided in the contract is deemed irregular and contrary to the above-cited regulations. 



We recommended and Management agreed to take the following courses of actions:



a)	Require the Inspection and Acceptance Committee and Supply Officer of Magallanes Campus to formally communicate the deficiency with the Supplier and return the substandard items, to ensure prompt action by the latter;



b)	Ensure that the substandard items are replaced with the correct items in conformity with the standards and specifications of the contract, prior to the full release of the retention money. If not replaced, the corresponding costs of the printers shall be deducted from the final payment; and



c)	Firmly remind the Inspection and Acceptance Committee and Supply Officers of all Campuses, to avoid receiving procured items which are not in conformity with the standards and specifications provided in the contract or purchase order as prescribed in the above-cited regulations. 



Liabilities



4)	Fund transfers from NGAs with balances aggregating ₱2.10 million for various completed, unutilized and/or non-moving programs, remained idle and were not returned to the Source Agencies (SA) or the National Treasury.



Paragraphs 4.9 and 6.7 of COA Circular No. 94-013 dated December 13, 1994 states that the Implementing Agency (IA) shall return to the SA any unused balance upon completion of the project.



Likewise, Section 63, Chapter 6 of the GAM for NGAs, Volume I, provides accounting policies for Inter-Agency Transferred Funds (IATF) which states among others, that:



a)	A Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) shall be entered into by the SA and the IA for the undertaking by the latter of the project of the former. The MOA shall provide for the requirements for project implementation and reporting.

 

Xxx



g.   The IA shall return to the SA any unused balance upon completion of the   project, if stipulated in the MOA. 



As of December 31, 2020, the total Due to NGAs account of SSC, which represents funds transferred by various NGAs to the College for the specific implementation of 21 identified programs or projects, totalled to ₱18.41 million broken down as follows:



No.

Name of NGAs/GOCCs/LGU

Balance (₱)









General Fund

 



1

Ako Bikol Partylist

                47,500.00 



2

BFAR - ROV-Aquasilviculture Project

                  5,720.00 



3

BFAR - ROV - National Inland Fisheries Enhancement Program

              500,000.00 



4

CHED-Financial Assistance under NSP-SSP

900.00 



5

CHED - ESGP-PA

489,320.04 



6

CHED - Modernization of Mechanical Eng'g

10,000,000.00 



7

CHED - SAFE Grant

355,865.00 



8

CHED - SAFE Loan

1,000,000.00 



9

CHED – SSGFCD

50,798.50 



10

CHED – STUFAP

61,336.00 



11

CHED- TDP TES

24,000.00 



12

CHED – TES

1,588,733.52 



13

CIBAC Partylist

7,999.98 



14

DOST - PCAARRD - Native Chicken

55,241.20 



15

DOST - PCAARRD - (STC4iD Project)

2,572,981.63 



16

DOST - PCAARRD - IP-TBM

522,554.95 



17

DOST - ROV - Crabmeat Processing

129,160.00 



18

PCAARRD/BCARRD - FITS Centers - Techno Gabay Program

33,772.29 



19

PCIERRD - Support for BCIERD R&D Program

38,474.10 



20

TESDA - Free TVET Program

175,511.34 



 

TOTAL – GF

17,659,868.55 



Special Trust Fund

 



1

CHED - TES

754,200.00 



 

TOTAL - STF

754,200.00 



GRAND TOTAL

18,414,068.55 



	

Analysis and aging of these accounts showed that 52.38 per cent or 11 out of the total 21 projects were already non-moving, unutilized or dormant as of December 31, 2020, with an accumulated balance of ₱2.10 million. These accounts remained in the books despite their age ranging from two to 16 years (detailed in Annex B).  A summary is presented in the succeeding table: 



Name of SA

Dormant

 On-Going 

 Total  



No. of Programs

 Amount (₱) 

No. of Programs

 Amount (₱) 

No. of Programs

 Amount (₱) 

General Fund

 

 

 

 

 

 

AKB Partylist

1

47,500.00 

 

 

1

47,500.00 

BFAR

2

505,720.00 

 

 

2

505,720.00 

CHED

4

1,407,563.50 

5

12,163,389.56 

9

13,570,953.06 

CIBAC Partylist

1

7,999.98 

 

 

1

7,999.98 

DOST

 

 

1

129,160.00 

1

129,160.00 

DOST-PCAARRD

2

89,013.49 

2

3,095,536.58 

4

3,184,550.07 

PCIERRD

1

38,474.10 

 

 

1

38,474.10 

TESDA

 

 

1

175,511.34 

1

175,511.34 

Special Trust Fund

 

 

 

 

 

CHED

 

 

1

754,200.00 

1

754,200.00 

Total

11

2,096,271.07 

10

16,317,797.48 

21

18,414,068.55 



Moreover, six out of these 11 projects were not supported by copies of the MOA executed between the SA and IA, thus, precluding the Auditor in establishing the requirements for project implementation, specifically the agreed project duration and reportorial requirements. Nevertheless, review of the available MOA, fund utilization reports (FURs)/liquidation reports and schedules from previous year’s Annual Audit Reports revealed information about the dormant balances as follows: 



a)	BFAR RO V – Aquasilviculture Project/National Inland Fisheries Enhancement Program with total balance of ₱0.51 million



Based on the Report of Disbursements submitted, liquidation reports for the duration of the project and FUR as of July 28, 2015 that was submitted by SSC to the SA, total disbursements for the Aquasilviculture Project amounted to ₱1.67 million with an unexpended balance amounting to ₱1.77 million that was duly refunded and received by the SA on September 28, 2016 under OR No. 8555288 indicating full settlement of the account. However, financial statements showed an outstanding balance of ₱5,720. According to the Accountant, the balance is attributable to an expenditure for the project that was recorded as an outright expense instead of deduction to the Due to NGAs account. The Accounting Unit, up to this date, cannot make the necessary adjusting entries since the nature of the said expenditure still cannot be traced to the original entries made. Therefore, the reported balance as of year-end does not signify a utilized balance but rather an accounting error that needs appropriate adjustment. 



Meanwhile, another MOA between BFAR and SSC was entered into in 2017 for the implementation of the Project Balik Sigla sa Ilog at Lawa (BASIL) otherwise called the National Inland Fisheries Enhancement Program (NIFEP) and funds were transferred to SSC amounting to ₱0.50 million. The funds remained unutilized and non-moving which indicates non-implementation of the project, thus, the objectives set forth in the agreement and the project itself was not achieved. 



b)	PCIERRD - Support for Bicol Consortium for Industry and Energy Research and Development (BCIERD) R&D Program with a balance of ₱38,474

	

Item number 3 of the MOA between the SSC and PCIERRD, states that, among others, the obligations of SSC as the IA shall:

		

	d. Submit to PCIERD through the BCIERD within sixty (60) days from the completion of the project the following:



--	A Project Terminal Report in three (3) hard copies and one (1) electronic copy as prescribed in the Outline for preparing DOST-GIA Project Terminal Report; and

--	The Audited Financial Report of all disbursements made out of the funds herein granted duly certified by the Accounting Officer and audited by the Internal Auditor of DOST-RO V and SSC using DOST Form 9B; and



e. Return to PCIEERD the unexpended balance of the grant fund upon the submission of Audited Financial Report.



The Accounting Office furnished the Auditor with a copy of the MOA together with the Terminal Audited Financial Report (TAFR) as of December 31, 2017 which showed total disbursements for the project amounting to ₱61,526 leaving an unexpended balance of ₱38,474. To validate the reported balance, a confirmation letter was sent to the IA Auditor for verification of the balances transferred by PCIERRD to SSC. As confirmed by the IA Auditor, accounting records of PCIEERD still showed a balance of ₱100,000 as of September 30, 2020 which indicates that the expenditures liquidated in the TAFR prepared by SSC was not yet reflected in the books of PCIEERD, thus, still reflected the total outstanding balance of fund for liquidation amounting to ₱100,000. The Auditor has reservations that the approved TAFR was actually submitted to the SA. Additionally, the unexpended balance of ₱38,474 should have been returned or refunded by SSC upon the submission of the TAFR to PCIERRD.  



c)	Scholarship Programs – from Ako Bikol (AKB) Partylist with balance of ₱47,500 and from Citizens Battle Against Corruption (CIBAC) Partylist amounting to ₱8,000  



Supreme Court (SC) Decision GR Nos. 208566, 208493 and 209251 released on November 19, 2013 ruled that Priority Development Assistance Fund (PDAF) is unconstitutional and therefore the unutilized portion thereof can no longer be used. Accordingly, this decision mandates that the remaining PDAF funds covered by this permanent injunction shall not be disbursed/released but instead reverted to the unappropriated surplus of the general fund.



Reports showed unutilized balances from AKB Partylist for the AKB Scholarship Program amounting to ₱47,500 that has been dormant for nine years and from CIBAC Partylist amounting to ₱8,000 which has been dormant for seven years, as well. 



Review of the MOA executed between SSC and AKB Partylist on July 08, 2011 confirmed that the fund for the intended scholarship program was sourced and allocated from the PDAF of AKB. Thus, the unutilized balance should have been reverted back to the National Treasury upon the declaration of unconstitutionality of the fund in 2013.



Moreover, an audit observation was already communicated in CY 2013 Annual Audit Report (AAR), recommending the immediate reconciliation of the GL and SL balances of the Due to NGAs-PDAF Scholarship Funds and the reversion of all outstanding and unutilized balances to the National Treasury. However, Management was unable to return the unutilized balances for these scholarship programs and these remained outstanding in the financial statements up to this date. 



The continued existence of these PDAF accounts in the books and the inability to return these to the National Treasury is contrary to the above-cited SC Decisions. Considering that these remaining balances can no longer be disbursed or utilized as mandated, it is appropriate that these funds be returned to the National Government for reprogramming and better use.



d.) DOST- Philippine Council for Agriculture, Aquatic and Natural Resources Research and Development (PCAARRD) with total outstanding balance of ₱89,013 and the CHED Financial Assistance/Scholarship Programs aggregating to ₱1,407,564



As for the remaining accounts that include balances from fund transfers from CHED for the implementation of four scholarship programs and financial assistance to students totalling to ₱1.41 million and the grants from DOST-PCAARRD for the implementation of two projects amounting to ₱89,013 cannot be verified due to non-submission of copies of MOAs and supporting documents such as financial and liquidation reports. Even so, schedules from previous years’ financial statements showed the same balances, thus, considered as dormant or non-moving accounts.  



Overall, the continued existence of dormant balances and non-reversion of unutilized funds to the SAs or the National Treasury, when the purposes thereof have already been attained or cannot be utilized anymore, deprived the stakeholders of the benefits that could have been derived had these programs been fully completed as planned and likewise denied the national government of resources that could have been put to better use. The conditions also affected the fair presentation of the Due to NGAs account. 



We recommended the following courses of action and Management agreed to:



a)	Instruct the Accounting Unit to exert extra effort in the review of financial/liquidation reports, retrieve source documents and other reports covering prior years’ transactions for fund transfers to identify errors made in recording and reconcile with the Accountant of SAs to undertake the adjustments accordingly and reflect the correct balances;



b)	Instruct the implementing Offices concerned and the Accounting Unit to ensure that Financial and/or Liquidation Reports are duly submitted to the SAs for proper recording and reconciliation;



c)	Revisit all the MOA with the respective NGAs, verify all utilizations and confirm final status of projects/programs to determine the proper disposition of unutilized funds. In the absence of MOA, the College thru its implementing offices or departments coordinate with the concerned NGAs to obtain copies of the MOA and confirm/reconcile balances to finally determine the appropriate disposition of such;



d)	Require the Accounting Office and focal offices to submit, henceforth, copies of all MOA/Trust Agreements with other NGAs to the COA Auditor’s Office for audit purposes; and



e)	Initiate the immediate return to SAs or the National Treasury of the reconciled unexpended balances for completed projects and dormant accounts under the Due to NGAs account.

 



5)	Unreconciled balances amounting to ₱2.51 million between the SLs and Annual Financial Reports (AFRs) for the two projects with the DOST PCAARRD as well as the non-submission of financial reports of the other on-going programs under the Due to NGAs account rendered the balance at year-end doubtful.



Section 111 of PD No. 1445 on the keeping of accounts provides that:



1)	The accounts of an agency shall be kept in such detail as is necessary to meet the needs of the agency and at the same time be adequate to furnish the information needed by fiscal or control agencies of the government.



2)	The highest standards of honesty, objectivity and consistency shall be observed in the keeping of accounts to safeguard against inaccurate or misleading information. 



Section 63, Chapter 6 of the GAM for NGAs, Volume I, on the Disbursement for IATF states, among others, that:



	e. A separate subsidiary record for each account shall be maintained by the IA  whether or not a separate bank account is opened.



f. Within ten (10) days after the end of each month/end of the agreed period for the Project, the IA shall submit the RCI and the RCDisb to report the utilization of the funds. Only actual project expenses shall be reported. The reports shall be approved by the head of the IA.



Furthermore, included in the MOA between SSC and the DOST-PCAARRD are the responsibilities of SSC as the IA, to wit:



IP-TBM

G. Submit at least three (3) copies of the following financial reports to DOST-PCCAARRD:



1)	Semi-annual financial report using DOST Form H, certified correct by the Agency Accountant and approved by the Agency Head within a month after each semester, supported by Report of Disbursement (ROD)



2)	Annual financial report using DOST Form H, certified correct by the Agency Accountant and approved by the Agency Head within two months after the end of each implementation year



3.  Terminal Audited Financial Report (TAFR) using DOST Form I within three (3) months after project implementation. The reported unexpended balance shall be refunded back to 	DOST-PCAARRD. 



STC4iD

	6. Submit at least three (3) copies of the following financial reports to PCAARRD:



a)	Semi-annual/ Annual financial report using DOST Form No. 4 certified correct by the Agency Accountant and approved by the Agency Head within a month after each project semester or within two months after end of each implementing year.



b. Terminal Audited Financial Report (TAFR) using DOST Form No. 9B within three (3) months after project completion. The reported unexpended balance shall be refunded back to PCAARRD. PCAARRD will not entertain new project proposals from the Agency until after the submission of the TAFR. 



Review of the SLs versus the AFRs covering the transactions on the receipt and utilization of funds revealed variances in the amounts between the AFR and the SLs of the two projects aggregating to ₱2.51 million as summarized in the table below:



CY 2020

DOST-PCAARRD (IP-TBM)

DOST-PCAARRD (STC4iD)



Amount (₱)

Amount (₱)



Per SL

Per AFR

Difference

Per SL

Per AFR*

 Difference 

Beginning Balance

0.00

0.00

0.00

930,446.11

445,529.70

484,916.41

Total Receipts

855,093.00

855,093.00

0.00

3,517,990.05

2,223,817.53

1,294,172.52

Total Expenditures

332,538.06

469,332.40

(136,794.34)

1,875,454.53

2,470,438.44

(594,983.91)

Ending Balance

522,554.94

385,760.60

136,794.34

2,572,981.63

198,908.79

2,374,072.84









                               *based on actual releases



As can be gleaned from the preceding table, total receipts and expenditures for the year as reflected in the SL did not tally with the figures in the AFRs. Total expenditures obtained from the AFR includes all the disbursements and accounts payable from the fund as of year-end. Since the Accounting Unit was not able to provide for a reconciliation of the said differences, an analysis and comparison was made by the Auditor between the two records.



For the project IP-TBM which is on its initial year of implementation, a net variance in the total expenditures of ₱136,794 was computed (Annex C). These pertains to expenditures that were reported in the AFR, as supported with the Receipts of Check Issued (RCI) or Report of Disbursements (ROD), but not reflected in the SL amounting to ₱14,381 and a cancelled check amounting to ₱39,767 that remained unadjusted in the SL, overstating the total disbursements for the year. Also, there were expenditures reported as accounts payable in the AFR amounting to ₱184,680, however, the SL only recorded the amount of ₱22,500, thereby, leaving an under recorded expenditures of ₱162,180.



On the other hand, for the STC4iD Project, variances were noted in beginning balance forwarded from the preceding year, as well as for the receipts and disbursements during the current year which resulted to a net variance of ₱2.37 million at year-end (Annex D). Details of the difference in the beginning balances for CY 2020 between the SL and AFR cannot be traced due to incomplete submission of financial reports during its first year of implementation. Also, it was noted that a receipt of fund during the year amounting to ₱1.29 million was recorded/posted twice in the SL and a reconciling item in the amount of ₱4,158 pertaining to expenses reported in the preceding year, thus, the net overstatement. Meanwhile, the difference for the expenditures during the year was also due to the expenditures that were reported in the AFR but not reflected in the SL and vice versa that resulted to a net variance of ₱0.59 million. 



In addition, copies of fund utilization or financial reports for other on-going programs of the SSC funded by CHED and TESDA under the Universal Access to Quality Tertiary Education Act (UAQTEA), were not submitted to COA hence, precluding the Auditor from validating the accuracy of the balances as reflected in the SL.



The non-reconciliation between the SL balances against the AFR before its submission to the SAs may result in variances in the reciprocal accounts of SSC and the SAs and subsequently, encounters difficulty in ascertaining correctness of any unexpended funds thereof that are required to be refunded to the SAs upon completion of the projects. 



We recommended that Management require the Accounting Office to:



a)	 Conduct immediate reconciliation between the SLs and Financial Reports to identify and correct the entries made, as discussed.  Henceforth, strictly observe periodic reconciliation of balances between the SL balances and the Financial Reports before their submission to the Source Agencies; and 



b)	Consistently furnish the Auditor’s Office with copies of the periodic financial reports or fund utilization reports of all the on-going programs/projects under fund transfers in compliance with the provisions in the MOA as well as Chapter 6 of the GAM for NGAs, Volume I.



Management Comment:



According to the Accounting Unit, the variance in the balances between the subsidiary ledgers and the AFRs were due to the difference in reporting requirements set by the SAs specifically on the presentation of accounts payables at year-end.  Nevertheless, the Accounting Unit assured that the said differences shall be fully accounted to ensure that reciprocal accounts between agencies are easily reconciled at any given time.





6)	Absence of details/specifics of some of the booked-up Guaranty/Security Deposits Payables in the amount of ₱421,230 and existence of various accounts aged more than three years amounting to ₱0.74 million.



Section 111(1) of PD No. 1445 provides that the accounts of an agency shall be kept in such detail as is necessary to meet the needs of the agency and at the same time be adequate to furnish the information needed by fiscal or control agencies of government.



Section 6 of the General Provisions of the General Appropriations Act (GAA) of 2020 defined Trust Receipts as receipts collected or received by departments, bureaus, offices, and instrumentalities of the National Government, including Constitutional Offices enjoying fiscal autonomy and SUCs: (i) Xxx; (ii) as a guaranty for the fulfillment of an obligation.



In addition, Section 10 of the above GAA also mandated SUCs, among other national government instrumentalities, to close and revert all balances of Special Accounts, Fiduciary or Trust Funds and Revolving Funds to the General Fund in any of the following instances: (i) when there is no legal basis for its creation; (ii) when their terms have expired; or (iii) when they are no longer necessary for the attainment of the purposes for which said funds were established. 



Also, GAM for NGAs, Volume III defines Guaranty/Security Deposits Payable as an account used to record the incurrence of liability arising from the receipt of cash or cash equivalents to guaranty (a) that the winning bidder shall enter into contract with procuring entity; and (b) performance by the contractor of the terms of the contract. This account is debited for refund after the fulfilment of the purpose of the bond or forfeiture upon failure to comply with the purpose of the bond. 



As of December 31, 2020, the College reported a total of 55 trust liabilities amounting to ₱3.19 million under the Guaranty/Security Deposits Payable account, with breakdown as follows:



Guaranty/ Security Deposits Payable



No. of Accounts



Total  

(₱)

General Fund

29

      2,434,650.87 

Special Trust Fund

26

         752,645.36 

Total

55

      3,187,296.23 



Audit of the Guaranty/Security Deposits Payable accounts disclosed that out of the above total, 19 accounts with aggregate amount of ₱421,230 or 34.55 per cent remained outstanding but details or purposes of the creation of such trust liabilities cannot be determined by the Accounting Unit.  Moreover, 15 accounts totalling ₱0.74 million or 27.27 per cent represents retention moneys and warranty securities paid by Contractors for payment of various goods, services and civil works, which are aged more than three years already indicating that the warranty or defects liability period had already lapsed. Details are presented in Annex E while a summary is shown in the table below.



Age

All Funds



 Amount 

(₱)

%

No. of Accounts/ Suppliers

%

0 - 12 months

    ,509,286.72 

47.35%

3

5.45%

1 - 3 years

       14,506.01 

16.14%

18

32.73%

Above 3 years

       42,273.51 

23.29%

15

27.27%

Unaccounted/Undetermined Balances

       421,229.99 

13.22%

19

34.55%

Total

   3,187,296.23 

100.00%

55

100.00%



Inquiry with the concerned Accounting personnel disclosed that the retention moneys were not refunded due to the non-submission of the suppliers of the letter request of refund to the agency which is a prerequisite for the filing of claim for refund or release of the retention money.  



Further review of the accounts included in the table above revealed the following deficiencies/observations:



a)	A retention money in the amount of ₱95,261 aged seven years pertains to amount retained from the first progress billing of the project “Labor & Materials for the Proposed Saline Tilapia Hatchery at SSC Magallanes Campus”, an unfinished project left by the contractor in year 2013. Since this was an abandoned project, and the completion of such is highly remote, an audit recommendation was made in the prior year’s audit report relative to the disposal of the said project and the derecognition of its cost in the Construction in Progress account. Hence, the related payables to the erring contractor shall also be forfeited in favor of the agency.



b)	Included in the account is a 10 percent retention fee amounting to ₱21,324 aged six years, which was withheld from the final payment to a contractor for the project “Proposed Covered Walk & Waiting Shed at Sorsogon Campus” on February 27, 2014.  The retention fee was correspondingly refunded to the contractor on March 7 of the same year with Check No. 840087 but was not reversed in the related SL which connotes probable inaccurate accounting of the transaction was made.



c)	A retention balance of ₱270 aged three years, was still reported as a trust liability despite of the appropriate refund that was made following the claim filed by the Supplier. The balance pertains to the difference between the amount of retention fee that was initially withheld and the actual amount requested by the supplier for refund which was lower than the former amount. Despite the full acknowledgement of the release of retention fee to the contractor, the negligible balance is still reflected in the books, thus, wanting of adjusting journal entries to correct the balance in the books.



d)	Nineteen accounts with an aggregate amount of ₱421,230 aged three years and above, were lacking in details as to the nature and coverage of the guaranty received.  The absence of such details casts doubt on the reliability of its inclusion as trust liabilities and precluded further validation of the propriety of the accounts.  Nonetheless, since records have identified the specific Contractors/Suppliers, the College should have exercised due diligence in establishing the existence and validity of claims by communicating with the concerned payees to avoid further aging of the accounts. 



Overall, the continued existence of balances without details/specifics and those accounts aged three years or more for which the related obligations may have been fulfilled already, rendered the year-end balance unreliable and affected the fair presentation of the account in the financial statements. More so, inability to establish claims and confirm the payees’ interests may also deprive the Government of possible resources which could have been put to better use, if the concerned payee-contractors decided to waive their rights to the claim.



We recommended and Management agreed to instruct the Accounting Unit to:



a)	Conduct a thorough reconciliation of the outstanding balances reported under the Guaranty/Security Deposits Payable account, especially those lacking with details to ascertain that the goods, services and infrastructure projects covered by the trust liability were indeed fully delivered/completed and no manufacturing and structural defects were detected during the warranty or defects liability period;



b)	Communicate with the suppliers/contractors to establish claims and confirm their interests for refund of the retention money for the related projects with warranty or defects liability period that had already lapsed and are without manufacturing and structural defects detected and for those retained from progress billings to prevent further aging of balances.  If warranted, cause the forfeiture of those balances which claims have been waived by the Suppliers; and



c)	Prepare necessary journal entries to adjust and correct the subsidiary ledger balances of those accounts that were already refunded to the Contractors.





Expenses



7)	Representation expenses incurred in connection with the various conferences of the Board of Trustees (BOT) for CY 2020 totalling to ₱60,567 were found to be unnecessary and excessive in nature.  



Sections 4, 5 and 6 of COA Circular No. 2012-003 dated October 29, 2012 are quoted as follows:  



4.0	"UNNECESSARY" EXPENDITURES



4.1 Definition



The term pertains to expenditures which could not pass the test of prudence or the diligence of a good father of a family, thereby denoting non-responsiveness to the exigencies of the service. Unnecessary expenditures are those not supportive of the implementation of the objectives and mission of the agency relative to the nature of its operation. This would also include incurrence of expenditure not dictated by the demands of good government, and those the utility of which cannot be ascertained at a specific time. An expenditure that is not essential or that which can be dispensed with without loss or damage to property is considered unnecessary. The mission and thrusts of the agency incurring the expenditures must be considered in determining whether or not an expenditure is necessary.



5.0 	"EXCESSIVE" EXPENDITURES



5.1 Definition



The term "excessive expenditures" signifies unreasonable expense or expenses incurred at an immoderate quantity and exorbitant price. It also includes expenses which exceed what is usual or proper, as well as expenses which are unreasonably high and beyond just measure or amount.  They also include expense in excess of reasonable limits



6.0 	"EXTRAVAGANT" EXPENDITURES



6.1 Definition



The term "extravagant expenditure" signifies those incurred without restraint, judiciousness and economy.  Extravagant expenditures exceed the bounds of propriety. These expenditures are immoderate, prodigal, lavish, luxurious, grossly excessive, and injudicious.



For CY 2020, the College incurred representation expenses relative to the conduct of regular and special board meetings of the BOT as enumerated below:



Date



Particulars



Amount (₱)

10-Mar-20

Native Bags

380.00 

10-Mar-20

Meals

2,420.00 

10-Mar-20

Donuts-4 boxes

1,365.00 

10-Mar-20

Hotel Accommodation

10,000.00 

29-May-20

Meals

1,253.00 

29-May-20

Meals

2,028.00 

11-Jun-20

Meals

2,066.00 

11-Jun-20

Meals

3,418.00 

11-Jun-20

Foods- 24pcs sandwich

360.00 

18-Sep-20

Meals

940.00 

18-Sep-20

Meals

2,067.00 

12-Oct-20

Meals

6,000.00 

29-Oct-20

Bibingka-2 boxes and 10 pcs.

400.00 

16-Nov-20

Meals

6,900.00 

03-Dec-20

Meals

2,400.00 

17-Dec-20

Native Slippers

200.00 

17-Dec-20

Native Baskets/Flowers

525.00 

20-Dec-20

Snacks- 20 boxes Bibingka

3,000.00 

21-Dec-20

Conserva Pili 26 packs

3,125.00 

22-Dec-20

Foods

2,400.00 

28-Dec-20

Grabfood

897.60 

28-Dec-20

Grabfood

609.00 

28-Dec-20

Grabfood

582.00 

28-Dec-20

Grabfood

555.00 

28-Dec-20

Grabfood

794.00 

28-Dec-20

Grabfood

882.00 

28-Dec-20

Foods

5,000.00 

Total 

 

60,566.60 



Perusal of the above transactions disclosed that the expenses incurred on March 10, 2020 were for a special pre-board meeting held at Legazpi City while the other disbursements made were for meals and snacks during the BOT’s meetings via zoom or video conferencing. Said transactions were paid through cash advances drawn by a special disbursing officer and were not subjected to the applicable rules on the procurement of goods/ services which are provided in the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act (RA) No. 9184. 



The BOT’s meetings conducted through zoom or video conferencing were due to the current quarantine and travel restrictions. Since the meetings were all virtual, the attendees were not required to gather in a particular venue as they can attend at the comfort of their own homes or at any place of their choice, hence, serving of meals and snacks may be dispensed with. 



Scrutiny of the liquidation reports for the settlement of cash advances and its attachments showed various official receipts or invoices from local restaurants in the province while some were from a food delivery service for meals ordered from various restaurants in Quezon City, incurring additional costs for delivery fees. Considering that all the meetings were through video conference and most of the attendees were only virtually present, the propriety of the quantities of snacks and meals procured from local restaurants are questionable. Moreover, electronic receipts presented to support the food delivery services in Quezon City show that orders were placed during times outside of official working hours and not agreeing with the start and adjournment period of the conference as indicated in the Minutes of the Meeting.   



For the meals procured from local restaurants within the province, receipts attached were not supported with specific details as to the quantities and type of food and drinks that were purchased. In addition, the expenses were not supported with attendance sheets as proof of consumption of the food/meals, or at the very least, even a screenshot captured during the conference showing the attendees, in lieu of signed attendance sheets.



The incurrence and disbursement of funds for representation expenses, such as, meals and snacks during video conferencing and for a one-day hotel accommodation and other expenses in connection with a pre-board meeting, in the total amount of ₱60,567 may be considered unnecessary, excessive and extravagant as they are not essential and can be dispensed with. It did not justify the purpose for which the expenditures have been incurred and has not promoted economy on the part of the government. The College could have saved the funds or appropriated the same to other vital programs/projects that will be beneficial to its personnel, clients and stakeholders.



We recommended and Management committed to discontinue the practice of paying meals and snacks of participants while attending video conferencing/zoom meetings. It is further recommended that only programs/projects essential to the operations of the Agency shall be given priority in order to avoid unnecessary, excessive and extravagant government expenditures as provided under COA Circular No. 2012-003. 





8)	Communication Allowance granted to the SSC BOT and Board Secretary for CY 2020 in the amount of ₱0.23 million are wanting of legal basis. Moreover, the claims were charged to Telephone Expense account but were not supported with actual receipts.



Section 17 of the CHED Memorandum Order No. 03, series of 2001 states that the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Members of the Governing Boards (GB) of chartered SUCs shall not receive any regular compensation as such but they shall receive entitlements to actual allowances allowed by law, and reimbursement of necessary expenses incurred during or in conjunction with their attendance in the regular meetings or special sessions of the GB or in connection with their performance of official business duly authorized by the GB through a Resolution. (emphasis supplied)



Item 5.3 of the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) National Budget Circular (NBC) No. 2007-510 dated May 8, 2007 provides that the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Members of the GB shall not be allowed other benefits, whether in cash or in kind, on top of the honoraria, except when specifically provided for by law. (emphasis supplied)



Section 3.1 of COA Circular No. 2012-003 dated October 29, 2012 states that “Irregular” expenditure signifies an expenditure incurred without adhering to established rules, regulations, procedural guidelines, policies, principles or practices that have gained recognition in laws.  Irregular expenditures are incurred if funds are disbursed without conforming with prescribed usages and rules of discipline.  



Audit of transactions related to the expenses of the SSC BOT disclosed that for CY 2020, they were paid the total amount of ₱226,000, gross of taxes, in the form of a communication allowance computed at ₱2,000 per member for each month served.  Breakdown as follows:



 

Position/Designation

Months Served

Communication Allowance

(₱)

Less: Tax

(₱)

Net

(₱)

1

CHED Commissioner

Chairman

12

 24,000.00 

 3,120.00 

20,880.00 

2

Representative - Senate

Member

12

  24,000.00 

 3,120.00 

 20,880.00 

3

Representative - Congress

Member

12

24,000.00 

 3,120.00 

20,880.00 

4

SUC President

Co-Chairman

12

  24,000.00 

  7,200.00 

 16,800.00 

5

NEDA Regional Director

Member

12

 24,000.00 

3,120.00 

20,880.00 

6

DOST Regional Director

Member

10

  20,000.00 

2,600.00 

17,400.00 

7

SSC Faculty 1

Member

5

10,000.00 

2,500.00 

7,500.00 

8

SSC Faculty 2

Member

7

 14,000.00 

4,200.00 

9,800.00 

9

SSC Alumni

Member

12

 24,000.00 

7,200.00 

16,800.00 

10

Student Trustee

Member

7

14,000.00 

            0.00   

14,000.00 

11

Board Secretary

 

12

 24,000.00 

     7,200.00 

     16,800.00 









226,000.00 

   43,380.00 

   182,620.00 



These benefits were disbursed thru cash advances drawn by an SDO and paid to the officials in cash thru a payroll, thus, liquidation reports for the cash advances were supported by signed payroll sheets only.  



Meanwhile, review of the journal entries made for the said expenses showed that the disbursements were charged to the Telephone Expense account. The Revised chart of Accounts (Updated 2019) provides that Telephone Expense account is debited to recognize the cost of transmitting messages thru telephone line (mobile or landlines), faxes, telex and the like whether prepaid or postpaid.  In addition, Section 6.2 of COA Circular No. 2012-001 dated June 14, 2012 provides for the specific documentary requirements for common government transactions for Telephone/Communication expenses as follows:



--	Statement of Account/ Bill;

--	Invoice/Official Receipt or machine validated statement of account

--	Certification by Agency Head or his authorized representatives that all National Direct Dial (NDD), National Operator Assisted Calls and International Operator Assisted Calls are official calls. 



Therefore, charging the above communication allowance to the Telephone Expense account was inappropriate because the said remunerations were granted and distributed, both in substance and in form, as an allowance with a fixed amount rather than as an allowance based on actual usage. However, if these allowances are in fact, intended to be given as other benefits, on top of their honoraria, the absence of a legal basis or a law authorizing such benefit renders the validity of the disbursement doubtful and may render the claims irregular and illegal under COA Circular No. 2012-003.



We recommended and Management concurred to immediately provide for a specific legal basis for the grant of Communication Allowance to the BOT, in accordance with CHED Memorandum Order No. 03, series of 2001 and DBM NBC No. 2007-510 dated May 8, 2007. In the meantime, we urged and Management agreed to discontinue the practice of granting communication allowance until the validity and legality of such is established. 





Procurement and Implementation of Infrastructure Projects



9)	Copies of contracts worth ₱75.35 million were not completely supported with the required documents and were not submitted for auditorial review and technical evaluation within the prescribed period. Likewise, no requests for technical inspection were submitted for completed projects in the total amount of ₱116.35 million.



COA Circular No. 2009-001 dated February 12, 2009, restating with amendment COA Circular No. 87-278 and COA Memorandum 2007-027, requires the submission of all contracts together with their supporting documents to the Commission on Audit within five (5) days after the perfection thereof for review and evaluation of the same. 



Section 3.1.1 of COA Circular No. 2009-01 dated February 12, 2009 states that contracts within five (5) working days from the execution of a contract by the government or any of its subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities, including government-owned and controlled corporations and their subsidiaries, a copy of said contract and each of all the documents forming part thereof by reference or incorporation shall be furnished to the Auditor of the agency concerned.



Likewise, Section 3.1.2 of said COA Circular provides that the copies of documents required to be submitted for contract review shall include, but not limited to the following:



a)	Invitation to Apply for Eligibility and to Bid;

b)	Letter of Intent;

c)	Eligibility Documents and Eligibility Data Sheet;

d)	Eligibility Requirements;

e)	Results of Eligibility Check/Screening;

f)	Bidding Documents (Sec. 17.1, IRR-A, RA 9184);

g)	Minutes of Pre-Bid Conference, if applicable

h)	Agenda and/or Supplemental Bid Bulletins, if any;

i)	Bidders Technical and Financial Proposals;

j)	Minutes of Bid Opening;

k)	Abstract of Bids

l)	Post Qualification Report of Technical Working Group;

m)	BAC Resolution declaring winning bidder;

n)	Notice of Post Qualification;

o)	BAC Resolution recommending approval;

p)	Notice of Award;

q)	Contract Agreement;

r)	Performance Security;

s)	Program of Work and Detailed Estimates;

t)	Certificate of Availability of Funds, Obligation Request;

u)	Notice to Proceed;

v)	Such other documents peculiar to the contract and/or to the mode of procurement and considered necessary in the auditorial review and in the technical evaluation thereof.



For technical review purposes, submission of contracts and their supporting documents shall furthermore be guided by the specific documentary requirements outlined in the checklist marked as Annexes “A” to “T” of the same Circular. 



During the audit, it was noted that copies of contracts for 17 out of 36 projects with total contract price of ₱75.35 million were not submitted to the Audit Team within five (5) days after the execution of the contract for review and evaluation, as shown in the attached Annex F.



Further evaluation of contracts and its attachments as submitted to the Audit Team for review showed that these were not completely supported by the required documents enumerated above.  Majority of the contracts were not supported with copies of Minutes of Bid Openings, Bidders Technical and Financial Proposals, Post Qualification Report, Performance Bond Coverage and Notice to Proceed.  



Moreover, review of the Report on Government Programs, Projects and Activities (GPPAs) for the year 2020 submitted by the Bids and Awards Committee (BAC) showed 27 projects with an aggregate cost of ₱116.35 million that were already reported as 100 per cent completed. However, Management was unable to submit letter request and its corresponding supporting documents for COA Technical Inspection. Shown in the table next page is the list of completed infrastructure projects for CY 2020 as of December 31, 2020.



Project

 Amount (₱) 

Date of Completion

Labor and Materials for the Rehabilitation of Student Dormitory at Sorsogon City Campus

    39,398,679.03 

03-Apr-20

Supply, Delivery and Installation of Crab Meat Processing Equipment at Magallanes Campus

    14,870,840.00 

30-Jan-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of Two-Storey Related Subject Building (Promotional Building) at Sorsogon City Campus

      4,634,179.71 

03-Jan-20

Labor and Materials for the Construction of Road Network in Engineering Campus - Baribag, Sorsogon City

      4,816,312.46 

11-Mar-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of Engineering Extension Building at Sorsogon City Campus 

      2,300,135.36 

29-Jan-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of Electrical & Electronics Building at Sorsogon City Campus

      2,839,931.35 

10-Mar-20

Labor and Materials for the Construction of Gate, Sidewalk & Covered Walk at Sorsogon City Campus

      9,954,778.17 

03-Aug-20

Labor and Materials for the Refurbishment of the Administration and Technical Building of Sorsogon City Campus

    11,641,074.13 

08-Oct-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of Science Laboratory Building (Damaged by Typhoon Tisoy) at Castilla Campus

      2,173,286.30 

22-Oct-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of Comfort Rooms in ICT/BME Building at Bulan Campus

      1,376,196.54 

18-Jan-20

Labor and Materials for the Painting of Two-Storey Related Building (Promotional Building) at Sorsogon City Campus

         992,980.44 

11-Mar-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of Meat Processing Building at Castilla Campus

         948,656.35 

03-Jul-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of College Library Building (Damaged by Typhoon Tisoy) AT Sorsogon City Campus

      1,670,697.82 

22-Oct-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of Accreditation Center Building at Magallanes Campus

         705,107.07 

13-Aug-20

Labor and Materials for Construction of Cistern Tank and Draining in Student Dormitory at Sorsogon Main Campus

      1,951,541.03 

16-Jul-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of School Clinic building (Damaged by Typhoon Tisoy) at Sorsogon City Campus

      1,340,323.19 

22-Jul-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of Education Building (Damaged by Typhoon Tisoy) at Magallanes Campus

      1,860,504.38 

12-Oct-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of Flooring of Engineering Laboratory and Autocad Room at Sorsogon City Campus

         367,213.30 

11-Sep-20

Labor and Materials for the Renovation of Perimeter Fence (Boundary Fence) Between SSC and SNHS

         561,381.00 

22-Oct-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of Agri-Mechanic Building (Damaged by Typhoon Tisoy) at Castilla Campus

      1,851,193.37 

03-Nov-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of Subject Related Building (Damaged by Typhoon Tisoy) at Castilla Campus

      1,981,114.20 

16-Nov-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of Automotive Building (Damaged by Typhoon Tisoy) at Sorsogon City Campus

      1,859,907.74 

17-Dec-20

Labor and Materials for the Construction of Deep Well at Engineering Campus- Baribag, Sorsogon City

      1,370,849.19 

04-Nov-20

Labor and Materials for the Installation of Fire Protection of New College Library Building at Sorsogon City Campus

      1,649,413.21 

29-Feb-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of Agrivet Building (Damaged by Typhoon Tisoy) at Castilla Campus

      1,170,775.71 

23-Oct-20

Labor and Materials for the Repair of Student Services Building (Damaged by Typhoon Tisoy) at Sorsogon City Campus

      1,152,765.50 

02-Nov-20

Labor and Materials for the Refurbishment of Fablab Room (Technology Faculty Room) at Sorsogon City Campus

         910,791.00 

10-Dec-20

27

  116,350,627.55 

 



The non-submission of a letter request for COA technical inspection shall also serve as a notification to the Audit Team of the projects that were already 100 per cent accomplished. Because of the absence of such request from Management, the Auditor only relied on the supporting documents as attached to the DVs for full payment of projects, which could take several months before these are actually paid and submitted to the Auditor. In this case, the documents for the last four completed projects shown in the table above were still not validated by the Auditor due to lacking attachments in the contracts submitted and no payments yet were reported to the Auditor.



Non-compliance with the rules and regulations stated above precluded the timely evaluation of the transactions as to their conformity with applicable laws, determination of physical existence of the projects and compliance with the approved plans and specifications for the project.



We recommended that Management take the following courses of action:



a)	Direct the BAC Secretariat to comply with the regulations and furnish the Auditor with the required copy of contracts with complete supporting documents within the prescribed period for the timely review and evaluation; and 



b)	Submit letter requests for inspection of completed projects, duly supported with Certificate of Completion and Turn-over and As-Built Plan, to the Audit Team for indorsement to the COA Regional Technical Services Office.



Management Comment:



In their written reply, Management, thru the BAC Secretariat, reasoned that the counting of the five-day period of submission of the contract, made by the Auditor, was based on the date of the preparation of the contract and not on the actual signing of the parties as may be deemed from the notarial date. It was the practice of the BAC Secretariat to affix on the face of the contract the date of its preparation/printing which may be interpreted as the date of execution. Nonetheless, the BAC Secretariat was advised by Management to take necessary steps to comply with the recommendations and the PMO was instructed as well to strictly abide by the recommendation to submit letter requests for inspection of completed projects.









Auditor’s Rejoinder:



The execution date referred to in the COA Circular does not necessarily mean as the notarization date. Legally, an execution date is the day both parties sign the contract. It is when both parties agree to the terms and conditions as the contract outlines. This is different from the date of notarization which may be done on the same or on a different date. The notary verifies identification of the contracting parties and does not signify the actual execution date. In this specific case, since the signature of SSC representatives and parties in the contracts, submitted to COA, were undated (blank), the execution date of the contract is construed to be the date affixed in the face or cover of the contract (1st page) and not the notarization date. Thus, to avoid further confusion and varied interpretations, we recommended that contracts be notarized as soon as prepared, executed and signed to facilitate submission to COA for conduct of timely contract review. We also acknowledge that, in compliance with the audit recommendation, the BAC Secretariat already took measures to ensure that contracts for CY 2021 are stamped-dated on the face of the document, the same day as the actual date of notarization.





10)	The Agency complied with the required preparation and posting of Annual Procurement Plan and Procurement Monitoring Report.



			Section 7.3.2 of the Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 otherwise known as the Government Procurement Reform Act requires that end-user or implementing units of the Procuring Entity shall formulate their respective Project Procurement Management Plans (PPMPs) for their different programs, activities, and projects (PAPs) which should also include the procurement methods to be adopted and indicate if the procurement tasks are to be outsourced. In conjunction, Section 7.3.4 holds the BAC Secretariat responsible for the consolidation of these PPMPs, including the recommended mode of procurement, into an APP which shall be subject to approval of the Head of the Procuring Entity (HOPE).



Moreover, Section 12.2 of the same IRR states that the BAC shall be responsible for ensuring that the Procuring Entity abides by the standards set forth by the Act and the IRR, and it shall prepare a Procurement Monitoring Report (PMR) in the form prescribed by the Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB). The PMR shall cover all procurement activities specified in the APP, whether ongoing and completed, from the holding of pre-procurement conference to the issuance of notice of award and the approval of the contract, including the standard and actual time for each major procurement activity. The PMR shall be approved and submitted by the HoPE to the GPPB in printed and electronic format within fourteen (14) calendar days after the end of each semester.  The PMR shall likewise be posted in accordance with Executive Order (EO) No. 662, series of 2007, as amended.



EO No. 662 entitled Enhancing Transparency Measures Under Republic Act. No. 9184 and Creating the Procurement Transparency Board was issued on September 20, 2007 as amended on November 15 of the same year. Section 1 of the E.O. requires that State Universities and Colleges (SUCs), among other government agencies, through their BAC shall post in the appropriate government website the following procurement reports:



a)	Annual Procurement Plan;

b)	Procurement Monitoring Report;



Inspection of the College’s official website showed an encouraging observation that SSC, for the past several years, was able to post its APP and Consolidated PMR under the Transparency Seal section.  It was also observed that the College was able to accomplish the prescribed GPPB Agency Procurement Compliance and Performance Indicator (APCPI) Self-Assessment Form with a very satisfactory agency rating. 



Validation of the copy of PMR furnished to the Auditor’s Office also showed compliance with the form as prescribed by GPPB.  However, the BAC Secretariat was not able to provide a copy of a duly received PMR by the GPPB as mentioned in the above-cited regulations.



Meanwhile, a review of the postings in the GPPB official website affirmed that SSC’s APP and PMR were not posted in their website, as opposed to the provisions of the E.O. wherein the GPPB shall cause to be maintained in the appropriate government website a database of proposed and concluded public sector contracts regardless of the amount involved.



We commended the efforts exerted by SSC to comply with the provisions of the IRR of RA No. 9184 and EO No. 662, as amended. Nevertheless, to further promote and enhance transparency, we encouraged and Management agreed to observe full compliance to the EO by ensuring that the APP and PMRs are officially submitted to the GPPB for their appropriate posting in their website. 





11)	Procurement activities for twenty-six projects with total approved budget of ₱126.95 million were not immediately commenced.  

 

Section 7.6 of the IRR of RA No. 9184 states that SUCs are encouraged to start their procurement activities immediately after the National Expenditure Program (NEP) has been submitted by the President to Congress, provided that the HoPE has approved the corresponding indicative APP.  This will facilitate the awarding of procurement contracts after the enactment of GAA, thereby, enabling the timely implementation and completion of programs and projects.



The same section also provides that no award of contract shall be made until the GAA, corporate budget or appropriations ordinance, as the case may be, has been approved or enacted.



During the year 2020, the College implemented a total of 36 projects with approved budget of ₱145.31 million sourced from various funds, as follows:  



Fund Source

Total No. of Projects

 Approved Budget 

(₱)

With delayed procure- ment

 Approved Budget 

(₱)

%

General Appropriations Act (NEP)

10

63,344,678.23 

6

  52,451,051.48 

60.00

STF-Accumulated Income Balances

25

66,960,711.00 

19

  59,496,238.00 

76.00

Trust Fund from other NGAs

1

15,000,000.00 

1

  15,000,000.00 

100.00

Total

36

145,305,389.23 

26

126,947,289.48 

72.22



Audit of the procurement activities for the above projects showed that 26 out of the total 36 projects or 72.22 per cent, with aggregate budget of ₱126.95 million were implemented quite late due to the delayed commencement of procurement activities. Perusal of the APP, Invitation to Bid and Bid Evaluation Reports exhibited that it took the College 34 to 660 calendar days (CD) or an average of 134 CDs from the time the budget was approved or enacted up to the advertisement or initial posting of invitation to bid for the said projects (details in Annex G).  



The delayed advertisement or posting of invitation to bid, which signals the start of the procurement activities resulted in an equivalent delay in the awarding of contracts and implementation of projects. Thus, it deprived the stakeholders of the timely use or benefits on the projects had they been implemented and completed on time.



We recommended and Management concurred to remind the concerned Unit Heads to closely coordinate with the BAC in the observance and commencement of procurement activities, for their proposed projects as planned, in accordance with the provisions of the IRR of RA No. 9184 to ensure their timely award, implementation and completion.





12)	Lack of preliminary detailed engineering investigation and activities resulted in deviations from original project specifications for the project: Construction of Freshwater Fishpond Development at Magallanes Campus with contract amount of ₱9.75 million.



Volume III of the Manual of Procedures for the Procurement of Infrastructure Projects, specifically Section 2 on Procurement Planning prescribes that no bidding and award of contract shall be made unless the detailed engineering investigations, surveys and designs including the acquisition of road right of way for the project have been sufficiently carried out. These investigations must then be duly approved in accordance with the standards and specifications prescribed by the Head of the Procuring Entity concerned or his duly authorized representative, and in accordance with the provisions of Annex “A” of the IRR. 



In supplement to these provisions, Annex A of the 2016 IRR to RA No. 9184, otherwise known as the Government Procurement Reform Act states that, a schedule of detailed engineering activities shall include, among others, the following:



a)	Survey

b)	Site Investigation

c)	Soils and Foundation Investigation

d)	Construction Materials Investigation

e)	Preparation of Design Plans

f)	Preparation of Technical Specifications

g)	Preparation of Quantity and Cost Estimates

h)	Preparation of Program of Work

i)	Xxx



Audit of the implementation of infrastructure projects of the College showed that the project Construction of Freshwater Fishpond Development at Magallanes Campus with an Approved Budget for the Contact (ABC) of ₱10.00 million was constructed with variation orders amounting to ₱5.42 million, from the Original Program of Works (POW) indicating deficiencies mainly in pre-engineering works and planning activities contrary to the above stated Manual, to wit: 



Description

 Original POW on ABC (₱) 

 Variation Order 

 Revised POW on ABC (₱)





 Addition 

(₱)

 Deduction (₱) 



1

Mobilization/Demobilization

    10,000.00 

0.00

0.00

     10,000.00 

2

Excavation for Dike - 20 days

    53,000.00 

   140,000.00 

    42,000.00 

     151,000.00 

3

Construction of Dike 1(43 mts)

455,544.00 

345,681.00 

 0.00  

801,225.00 

4

Construction of Dike 2(353mts)

1,828,170.00 

605,745.00 

572,400.00 

1,861,515.00 

5

Construction of Dike 3(190mts)

1,594,485.00 

1,088,451.00 

1,254,015.00 

1,428,921.00 

6

Concrete Road and Rip-Rapping on Sidings

1,641,519.00 

2,255,580.00 

661,068.00 

    3,236,031.00 

7

Concrete Manhole

75,249.00 

26,203.50 

           0.00   

101,452.50 

8

Installation Reinforced Concrete Culvert

624,375.00 

742,100.00 

624,375.00 

742,100.00 

9

Forms and Scaffoldings

27,675.00 

218,295.00 

0.00   

245,970.00 

10

Construction of Concrete Tanks and Canal

2,268,175.50 

0.00   

2,268,175.50 

              0.00  

DIRECT COSTS

8,578,192.50 

5,422,055.50 

5,422,033.50 

8,578,214.50 

INDIRECT COSTS

1,421,807.50 

            0.00   

22.00 

1,421,785.50 

TOTAL

10,000,000.00 

5,422,055.50 

5,422,055.50 

10,000,000.00 



According to the justification provided by the Project Director, the changes in the scope of works were due to the following expectations that were considered during the preparation of the initial bill of materials: (a) It was expected that only fifty percent of the filling materials for the road construction will be required since there is an existing temporary dike used as pathway to pass over the boundary area; and (b) Only fifty percent of filling materials was also considered  for the hatchery area since it was anticipated that the rest of the filling materials shall come from the fish pond area to be excavated. 



However, during mobilization of the project, the project team discovered that the quality of earth fill extracted from the fish pond area is not suited to be used as a filling material because of its soft and muddy properties, thus, they deemed it fit to use clay earth fill instead, as it is a better filling material because it is harder and can easily be compacted. So as not to hamper the project, a revised scope of work was prepared by the Project Director and approved by the HoPE, of which the amount originally programmed for the construction of concrete tanks and canal at the hatchery area was used for the additional quantities of earth fill needed for the construction of roads. The table above showed the scope/program of work before and after the variation order which displayed that line item of work no. 10 was fully deleted from the original scope of work to offset the value of additions made in quantities and scope of other line of work.



For a more adept judgement on the correctness of the changes made in the scope of work of the project, the Auditor referred the matter to the COA Regional Technical Services for their technical review and evaluation. While waiting for such review, the Auditor has reservations on the aptness of deletion of item of work no. 10, which is not in keeping with Section 4, Volume III of the Manual of Procedures for the Procurement of Infrastructure Projects which states that the addition/deletion of works should be within the general scope of the project as bid and awarded, and the deletion of the work should not affect the integrity and usefulness of the structure.



Moreover, although the As-Built Plan/Drawing was provided to the Auditor, copies of the revised bill of materials, as prepared and concurred by the Contractor, reflecting the detailed variation/change order based on the Contract Price was not yet furnished to this Office, thus, precluded further evaluation of the matter.   



Had the Project Management Team complied strictly with the Manual of Procedures for the Procurement of Infrastructure Projects and conducted a thorough site and soils investigation as part of its detailed engineering activities, the change order could have been avoided, thus government resources could have been efficiently used and maximized.



We recommended and Management agreed to:



a)	Remind the Planning and Project Management Office to adhere strictly with the Manual of Procedures for the Procurement of Infrastructure Projects and the IRR of RA No. 9184 regarding conduct of detailed engineering activities prior to bidding and subsequently monitor compliance with technical standards and work specifications to avoid unnecessary variations from original scope of works; and



b)	Furnish the Auditor immediately, with a copy of the Revised Bill of Materials, Revised Detailed Breakdown of the Contract Amount showing all variation orders, as prepared and concurred by the Contractor, to support the As-Built Plans/Drawings submitted earlier by the Project Director for further audit and evaluation.	









13)	Possible lapses in the post-qualification process led to the award of several infrastructure projects with coinciding project duration to the same contractor with same key personnel assigned and equipment pledged to different projects.



Section 23.6, Rule VIII of the 2016 Revised IRR of RA No. 9184 provides:



Notwithstanding the eligibility of a bidder, the Procuring Entity concerned reserves the right to review the qualifications of the bidder at any stage of the procurement process if the Procuring Entity has reasonable grounds to believe that a misrepresentation has been made by the said bidder, or that there has been a change in the bidder's capability to undertake the project from the time it submitted its eligibility requirements. Should such review uncover any misrepresentation made in the eligibility requirements, statements or documents, or any changes in the situation of the bidder which will affect the capability of the bidder to undertake the project so that it fails the eligibility criteria, the Procuring Entity shall consider the said bidder as ineligible and shall disqualify it from obtaining an award or contract, in accordance with Rules XXI, XXII, and XXIII of this IRR.



Section 34.3, Rule X of the same IRR also provides:



The post-qualification shall verify, validate, and ascertain all statements made and documents submitted by the bidder with the Lowest Calculated Bid/Highest Rated Bid, using non-discretionary criteria, as stated in the Bidding Documents.  These criteria shall consider, but shall not be limited to, the following:



		a)	Technical Requirements. To determine compliance of the goods, infrastructure projects, or consulting services offered with the requirements specified in the Bidding Documents, including, where applicable:



			i)		Verification and validation of the bidder's stated competence and experience, and the competence and expertise of the bidder's key personnel to be assigned to the project, for the procurement of Infrastructure Projects and Consulting Services;



			ii)		Verification of availability and commitment, and/or inspection and testing of the required capacities and operating conditions, of equipment units to be owned/leased/under purchase by the bidder for use in the contract under bidding, xxx



Review of infrastructure projects implemented by the College during the year disclosed that seven projects with total contract costs of ₱34.27 million were completed after the lapse of their contract periods, thus delaying the final turnover of said projects from 25 to as much as 106 calendar days or an average of 66 CDs.  Details are shown in Annex H.

As can be observed from the table in Annex H, despite consideration for time extensions due to the implementation of the Enhanced Community Quarantine (ECQ) in the province and unfavorable weather conditions, the contractors still incurred delays.  Looking more closely, we noticed that several projects with coinciding periods of implementation were awarded to the same contractor with the same key personnel assigned and equipment pledged on these projects which are situated in different locations. This has definitely affected the contractor’s capability to complete the projects on time. 



Meanwhile, Annex I presents the projects awarded to each contractor and the project duration or period of implementation for each project. The table also shows that the coinciding projects awarded to each contractor are situated on different campuses with distant locations which presented another limitation in the efficient and timely completion of the projects.



To emphasize, the distance of Castilla, Bulan and Magallanes Campuses from the Main Campus in Sorsogon City is approximately 28.3 kms., 61.1 kms. and 56.3 kms. respectively. Hence, the same contractor having concurrent projects being implemented at different campuses could cause delay in the implementation of projects considering the limited equipment and the distance of the location of the projects.



Examination of the eligibility documents submitted and scrutiny of attached sales invoices, official receipts, deed of sale and leased agreements revealed that the contractor’s available equipment, whether owned or leased, were quite limited to implement the awarded projects and the List of Equipment, Owned or Leased and/or under Purchase Agreements, pledged to the proposed contracts were almost the same for all the projects awarded.



Further, the list of contractor's personnel (e.g. Project Manager, Project Engineers, Materials Engineers, Safety Engineers, Foreman and Skilled workers) proposed to be assigned to each contract also showed that almost the same personnel were assigned to all projects awarded to them.

	

For economic reasons, we understand that resources, such as, machineries and personnel have to be maximized, but this shall always be done without prejudice to the efficiency, quality and timeliness of delivery of infrastructure projects. Likewise, though corresponding liquidated damages were properly imposed from the contractors for said projects which have incurred delays, the above circumstances are indicative of possible lapses in the process of post qualification of contractors of the seven infrastructure projects, not in keeping with Section 34.3(b)(i)(ii), Rule X of the 2016 IRR of RA No. 9184.



Had the post qualification of the contractors been done carefully in accordance with the regulation, the BAC particularly the TWG could have noticed that the contractors' personnel to be assigned and equipment to be utilized were almost the same for all the projects awarded to them. The lack of personnel to supervise the simultaneous implementation of the projects and the insufficiency of the contractors' equipment could result in delay of completion of projects within the specified period of time, depriving the agency of the benefits from using the same at the earliest time. 



We recommended and Management agreed to remind the BAC and its TWG to practice caution in the examination of the contractor’s manpower and equipment on all the projects to be awarded and not on individual project only in case the contractor is the lowest bidder in several projects which have the same or coinciding period of implementation.





Submission of Accounts



14)		Two hundred fifty-eight (258) DVs for various payments with an aggregate amount of ₱35.63 million were not submitted or presented to the Auditor.

	

Section 122 of PD No. 1445 or State Auditing Code of the Philippines states that whenever deemed necessary, the Commission may require the agency heads, chief accountants, budget officers, cashiers, disbursing officers, administrative or personnel officers and other responsible officials of the various agencies to submit trial balances, physical inventory reports, current plantilla of personnel, and such other reports as may be necessary for the exercise of its functions.



		Likewise, Section 7.2.1(a) of COA Circular No. 2009-006 dated September 15, 2009 requires that the reports and supporting documents submitted by the accountable officers are immediately recorded in the books of accounts and submitted to the Auditor within the first ten (10) days of the ensuing month.

	

		Audit of disbursements for CY 2020 showed that a total of 258 DVs of the College for various payments totalling to as much as ₱35.63 million were not submitted or presented to the Auditor for post audit and validation, summarized as follows:

	

Fund/Account

No. of Unsubmitted DVs

Aggregate Amount (₱)

General Fund

243

  35,519,928.39 

STF

5

          5,720.25 

IGP

10

      102,500.00 

TOTAL

258

35,628,148.64

	

It was also noted that 193 DVs out of the total 243 unsubmitted DVs for General Fund were for the month of December 2020 as verified from the RCI prepared by the Cashier. The delayed and/or non-submission of various reports and its supporting documents precluded the timely verification of the propriety of transactions, thus, the reliability of financial information could not be ascertained. Likewise, reported transactions without documentation may be subject for audit suspension or disallowance.

	

		The non-submission of DVs and its supporting documents, either paid or even when cancelled are contrary to the above-cited provisions and precluded the Auditor from ascertaining the validity and propriety of such transactions.

		We recommended that Management require the Accounting Unit to immediately gather all unsubmitted DVs as provided in the list and submit to the Office of the Auditor. Henceforth, ensure timely and complete submission of all DVs and its supporting documents for proper verification and post audit.



Management Comment:



In action to the recommendation, the Finance Director immediately issued a memorandum to the concerned staff who has custody of the said DVs. After such issuance, DVs for the month of December were submitted to the Office of the Auditor in March 2021.



Auditor’s Rejoinder:



Out of the 258 unsubmitted vouchers, a total of 197 DVs had already been submitted to the Auditor as of April 30, 2021, leaving 61 unsubmitted DVs with an aggregate amount of ₱7.17 million. However, further re-validation showed that aside from the initially reported 258 unsubmitted DVs, one more voucher under Fund 101 with DV# 20-09-108; Check# 1305382 amounting to ₱25,510 was also not yet submitted for audit. In effect, a total of 62 DVs still remained unsubmitted, to date, with a total amount of ₱7.19 million (please refer to Annex J).





B)	COMPLIANCE WITH GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT (GAD)



28. The College’s Annual GAD Plan and Budget (GPB) was prepared without reference to an established multi-year GAD Framework and Agenda.



Sections 2 and 3 of the Philippine Commission on Women (PCW) Memorandum Circular No. 2018-04 reads:



PURPOSE



This Memorandum Circular provides the guidelines and procedures in the formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of the multi-year GAD Agenda as basis for the annual GAD Plans and Budgets of agencies.



GENERAL GUIDELINES



	1)	The GAD Agenda is the agency’s strategic framework and plan on gender mainstreaming, and achieving women’s empowerment and gender equality. It shall:



		1)	serve as basis in identifying programs, activities, and projects to be undertaken to achieve the GAD goals and outcomes;

		2)	provide the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework for assessing GAD results and outcomes that shall be the basis for strengthening the mainstreaming of a GAD perspective in the agency’s operations and programs; and

		3)	be formulated in a participatory, consultative and inclusive process.  It shall consider results from consultations with women target beneficiaries as well as women’s groups/organizations working on the sector and other concerned stakeholders, and the identified gaps resulting from gender analysis.



In addition, Section 4 of the same Memorandum Circular states that the GAD Agenda has two parts consisting of the GAD Strategic Framework (GADSF) which outlines the agency’s GAD Vision, Mission and Goals anchored on the mandate of the agency and the GAD Strategic Plan (GADSP) which defines the strategic interventions, indicators, and targets to be pursued to achieve GAD goals over a period of time.  The timeframe of the GAD Agenda is six years.



For CY 2020, the College prepared their GPB showing a proposed budget of ₱18.84 million or 5.09 per cent of the total appropriation for the year amounting to ₱370.40 million, for activities identified and attributed to GAD. However, upon review and evaluation of proposed activities by the PCW, the endorsed GPB only showed a total budget of ₱13.94 million or 3.76 per cent of the total appropriations which qualified as GAD related PPAs. Subsequently, the GAD Accomplishment Report (AR) for CY 2020 reported a meager 0.72 per cent accomplishment with a total utilized amount of ₱2.66 million due to uncontrollable circumstances brought by the pandemic. An illustration is presented as follows:



Particular 

Amount (₱)

Percentage (%) 

a

Total Appropriation for CY 2020

370,402,000.00

 

b

Minimum required Attribution/Allocation for GAD (5%)

18,520,100.00

5% of (a)

c

GAD Plan and Budget 2020

13,935,000.00

3.76% of (a)

d

GAD Accomplishment 2020

2,662,874.33

0.72% of (a)



According to the GAD Director, all of the GAD activities that were not accomplished during the year were carried forward to the GPB of the ensuing year. Further inquiry and validation disclosed that the College’s GPB was prepared annually without referring to an established GAD Agenda and Framework. It was actually evident since capacity building activities for the formulation of the College’s GAD Agenda and Framework has remained to be one of the programmed GAD activities for the past years.



The absence of a multi-year GAD Agenda and Framework did not provide reasonable assurance that the activities identified in the annual GPB are actual results or issues derived from an appropriately conducted gender analysis. Moreover, the non-preparation of a GAD Agenda indicates that the agency’s GAD Vision, Mission and Goals were not clearly specified, thus, resulted to nonstrategic planning of activities and unsound target-setting policies. 



In addition, since an established GAD Agenda shall also serve as a monitoring and evaluation framework for assessing GAD results and outcomes, the absence of such did not contribute to the strengthening of mainstreaming of GAD perspectives in the College’s operations and programs, contrary to the above-cited provisions.  



We recommended and Management agreed to require the GAD Focal Point System, in participation and consultation with concerned beneficiaries and stakeholders, to formulate a six-year GAD Agenda guided by the gender equality and women’s empowerment outcomes and goals embodied in the Magna Carta of Women and Philippine Plan for Gender Responsive Development 1995-2025.





1)	The GAD Focal Point System was not fully institutionalized and functional, thus, the Agency was not able to establish a GAD database or a sex-disaggregated data as concrete basis for gender mainstreaming and attribution of programs and projects to gender and development.



Section 4 of PCW-NEDA-DBM Joint Circular No. 2012-01 enumerates the essential elements in GAD planning and budgeting which will enable agencies to more effectively plan and implement their sectoral programs on GAD, as follows:



4.1 Creation and/or Strengthening of the GAD Focal Point System: Xxx, all agencies should have an institutionalized and functional GAD Focal Point System (GFPS);



4.2 Capability Building on Gender and Development: A clear understanding and appreciation of gender and development is a pre-requisite for a successful GPB.  Agencies are required to regularly undertake orientations and capacity development on GAD including GAD-related laws and commitments for their employees.  Trainings should include gender mainstreaming, gender analysis and gender-responsive planning and budgeting.



4.3 Conduct of Gender Audit: Xxx



4.4 Institutionalizing GAD Database/ Sex-disaggregated Data: The agency shall develop or integrate in its existing database GAD information to include gender statistics and sex-disaggregated data that have been systematically produced or gathered as inputs or bases for planning, budgeting, programming, and policy formulation.



According to the Handbook on the Application of the Enhanced Gender Mainstreaming Evaluation Framework (GMEF) issued and published in 2016 by the PCW, the following are the enabling mechanisms for an effective gender mainstreaming during the Formation and Installation levels:



--	Functional GFPS;

--	Gender Responsibility shall form part of the Individual Performance Commitment and Review (IPCR) of the GFPS and key people in the organization;

--	Establish and maintain GAD Database; amd

--	GAD competence of internal and external stakeholders.



Review of the Agency’s GPB for the year showed inadequacies in terms of identification of gender issues, activities and targets. This observation is also evidenced by the deficient budgets attributed to GAD programs. Also, the GPB was not supported with current statistics since there was no sex-disaggregated data established by the GFPS.



Although a complete GFPS was created by the College, with clear roles and responsibilities, composition and organizational structure provided, it was observed, and admitted by the GAD Director as well, that the GFPS was not fully working and functional due to the lack of gender awareness among its members, thus did not advocate such programs. Although majority of the Officers have already attended gender awareness and sensitivity trainings in the past, said trainings still seemed insufficient to fully catalyse their drive towards achieving the agency’s goals on gender equality and women empowerment. Agencies shall develop GAD capacity development programs that support continuing gender education and these programs shall be integrated in the regular agency Human Resource Development Plan.



It was also confirmed that the gender responsibility of GFPS did not form part of their Individual Performance Commitment and Review (IPCRs) as mandated in the above-mentioned Handbook. Section 4.3 of the PCW Memorandum Circular No. 2011-01 dated October 21, 2011 states that the tasks and functions of the members of the GFPS shall form part of their regular key result areas and work plans and shall be given due consideration during performance evaluation.



As a result, the GPB exhibited poor mainstreaming of gender perspectives and dimensions in the design implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the agency’s policies, program and projects. The GAD Director also acknowledged the failure to perform the prescribed gender analysis tools such as the GMEF Checklist for activities and the Harmonized Gender and Development Guidelines (HGDG) Tool for projects, to aid gender mainstreaming and attribution.  It is emphasized that the attribution to the GAD budget of a portion or the whole of the budget of an agency’s major programs is a means toward gradually increasing the gender responsiveness of government programs and budgets. 



We recommended and Management agreed to undertake the following courses of actions:



a)	Conduct a review and update the composition of the GAD Focal Point System, particularly the TWG, who shall dutifully facilitate the gender mainstreaming efforts and lead the advocacy activities of the Agency; and



b)	Instruct the GFPS to include in the GPB and ensure timely implementation of activities for capacity building on gender awareness and sensitivity, as well as trainings on the correct use of gender analysis tools for the members of the GFPS and employees to ensure that they are capacitated on gender mainstreaming as mandated by PCW-NEDA-DBM Joint Circular No. 2012-01 and PCW Memorandum Circular No. 2011-01.





2)	Non-observance of the use of non-sexist language in all official documents, communications and issuances of the Agency.



Civil Service Commission (CSC) Memorandum Circular No. 12, series of 2005 prescribes the use of non-sexist language in all official documents, communications and issuances of the agency.  



The same Memorandum Circular also emphasized, that language as a very essential tool in communication, the need to recognize the importance of transforming language from traditional usage to a more liberating one which is gender-sensitive.  Since government employees and officials encounter gender issues every day, the use of non-sexist language in preparing letters, memoranda, and other issuances, will encourage them to make a conscious effort to avoid implicit and explicit discriminatory language against women or men. This, in turn, will help promote gender-sensitivity in the bureaucracy. A list of suggestions on how to use non-sexist language was also provided in the Memorandum Circular.



During the conduct of audit, it was observed that sexism was not yet eliminated in most of the official communications of the Agency, specifically when addressing persons by using Ms. instead of the traditional Mrs. for married women, which is perceived to be more gender sensitive. 



Interview with the GAD Director disclosed that the College has not yet adopted the CSC Memorandum Circular and has not yet issued any memorandum or an administrative policy on the use of non-sexist and gender-fair language in all official documents, communications and issuances of the agency. 



We recommended and Management concurred to consider adopting the use of non-sexist language in all official documents, communications and issuances of the agency as encouraged in the CSC Memorandum Circular No. 12, series of 2005 and include in the GPB, other activities that will promote the use of gender-fair language and sensitivity within the organization.





C)	COMPLIANCE WITH TAX LAWS



3)	Taxes withheld from all sources with a balance of ₱0.63 million at year-end was not remitted within the prescribed period. Moreover, the year-end balance showed unreconciled differences between the SL and GL amounting to ₱170,310. 

Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) Revenue Memorandum Circular (RMC) No. 57-2014 provides that Monthly Remittance Return of Income Taxes Withheld on Compensation, Creditable Income Taxes and Final Income Taxes be filed and paid on or before the 10th day of the following month in which withholding was made, except for taxes withheld for the month of December of each year, which shall be filed on or before January 15 of the succeeding year. While the Monthly Remittance Return on VAT and Other Percentage Taxes withheld is due on or before the 10th day of the month following the month in which the withholding was made.



Section VI (e) of the RMO No. 23-2014 states that for NGAs, GOCCs and other Government Offices, the Chief Accountant and the Head of Office of the Official holding the highest position (such as the President, Chief Executive Officer, Governor, General Manager) are duty bound to deduct, withhold and remit taxes.



Moreover, Section 111(1) of PD No. 1445 provides that the accounts of an agency shall be kept in such detail as is necessary to meet the needs of the agency and at the same time be adequate to furnish the information needed by fiscal or control agencies of government.



As of December 31, 2020, the College reported an ending balance of ₱0.63 million under the Due to BIR account in the financial statements representing taxes withheld subject for remittance. However, the SL, maintained for each Fund revealed a total ending balance of ₱0.80 million, thus, a difference of ₱170,310 between the two records, as presented in the table as follows:



Fund

Subsidiary Ledger

Balance per FS  



(₱)

Difference  





(₱)



Beginning Balance 

(₱)

Tax Withheld

 (₱)

Tax Remitted 

(₱)

Balance 



(₱)





General Fund (GF)

462,182.17

22,194,589.49

22,726,208.70

(69,437.04)

        0.00

(69,437.04)

Special Trust Fund (STF)

850,650.12

3,606,364.30

3,590,335.30

866,679.12

626,932.02

239,747.10

Income Generated Projects (IGP)

        233.16

      6,223.56

      5,690.08

       766.64

      766.64

           0.00

Total

1,313,065.45

25,807,177.35

26,322,234.08

798,008.72

627,698.66

170,310.06



Review of entries was made to re-validate and account for the net difference of ₱170,310 between the SL and FS balances. According to the Accountant, the negative balance for the General Fund, signifying over-remittance amounting to ₱69,437, pertains mainly to taxes that were withheld from transactions wherein the corresponding checks have become stale and/or cancelled. These are currently being traced and reconciled by the Accounting Unit and still subject to adjustments or correcting entries. 



Meanwhile, the difference in STF account amounting to ₱239,747 mainly pertains to the last entry made by the Accounting Unit in the SL to balance the record with the GL/FS.  According to the Accountant, the amount represents accumulated past due balances of Due to BIR account that may have been the result of previous errors in recording/postings in the SL. However, the Accountant could not provide for the specific details and breakdown for the amount.   



Perusal of records submitted to the Auditor also disclosed that out of the total unremitted balance as of December 31, 2020, only ₱421,366 were remitted on January 25, 2021, leaving an unremitted balance of ₱376,643 for all funds, inclusive of the unaccounted differences. 



We recommended and Management agreed to strictly require the Accounting Unit to conduct further reconciliation and analysis to trace the differences in balances and ensure that appropriate adjusting entries are made to reflect the correct balances still due for remittance to the BIR.

		

	

D)	COMPLIANCE WITH THE GOVERNMENT SERVICE INSURANCE SYSTEM (GSIS) ACT OF 1997



4)	The College was compliant with the pertinent provisions of IRR of the Government Service Insurance Act of 1997 with total premium remittances during the year amounting to ₱29.44 million except for the prior year’s outstanding liability of ₱3,220 that remains unremitted and/or unadjusted as of year-end.



Section 14, Rule III of the Revised IRR of RA No. 8291 otherwise known as the GSIS Act of 1997, provides that: 



14.1	Each government agency shall remit directly to the GSIS the employees’ and government agency’s contributions within the first ten (10) days of the calendar month following the month to which the contributions apply.  The remittance by the government agency of the contributions to the GSIS shall take priority over and above the payment of any and all obligations, except salaries and wages of its employees. 



14.2 The government agency shall also deduct from the fixed monthly compensation of the employee the loan amortizations (consolidated loans, policy loan, emergency loan, housing loan, and other loans), premium payments (optional, pre-need and other non-life insurance)



14.3 The said amounts shall be remitted to the GSIS within the first ten (10) days of the calendar month following the month when the deductions were effected, accompanied by supporting lists in the form prescribed by the GSIS. 



For CY 2020, the College withheld a total of ₱29.38 million and subsequently remitted to the GSIS an amount totalling ₱29.44 million.  Details are shown in the table next page. 



Fund Classification

 Beginning Balance (₱)

 Amount Withheld (₱) 

 Amount Remitted (₱) 

 Balance (₱)

General Fund

62,515.55

29,381,405.75

29,443,921.30

        0.00

Special Trust Fund

   3,220.20

              0.00

               0.00

3,220.20

IGP

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Total

65,735.75

29,381,405.75

29,443,921.30

3,220.20

	

The outstanding liability under the STF amounting to ₱3,220 is a forwarded balance from previous years. The Accountant stated that this may have been the result of previous errors in recording/posting in the SL and the Accounting Unit has not yet traced records from prior years’ transactions.	



We recommended and Management agreed to strictly require the Accounting Unit to trace the outstanding balance of the Due to GSIS account under the Special Trust Fund and immediately take appropriate action either by remitting the amount to the GSIS or provide the corresponding journal entries for the corrections/adjustments.





E)	COMPLIANCE WITH THE HOME DEVELOPMENT MUTUAL FUND (HDMF) LAW OF 2009



5)	The College was compliant with the pertinent provisions of the IRR of the HDMF Law of 2009 with total premium remittances during the year amounting to ₱5.06 million except for the prior year’s outstanding liability of ₱30,380 that remains unremitted and/or unadjusted as of year-end.



Section 3(a), Rule VII of the IRR of RA No. 9679 or the Home Development Mutual Fund Law of 2009, otherwise known as the Pag-IBIG Fund, requires that all employers shall remit to the Fund their contributions and the contributions of their covered employees as well as the latter’s loan amortizations or payments to the Fund, as provided for under Section 2 of this Rule, when applicable, within fifteen (15) days from the date the same were collected unless another period is previously agreed upon between the employer and the Fund, or within such periods as the Fund may prescribe otherwise.



For the current year, the College withheld premiums and loan repayments from its officers/employees an amount totalling ₱5.06 million and correspondingly remitted the same amount to the HDMF. Details are as follows:



Fund Classification

Beginning Balance (₱)

Amount Withheld (₱)

Amount Remitted (₱)

Balance (₱)

General Fund

        0.00

5,063,595.63

5,063,595.63

        0.00

Special Trust Fund

30,380.14

            0.00

             0.00

30,380.14

IGP

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Total

30,380.14

5,063,595.63

5,063,595.63

30,380.14



The outstanding liability under the STF amounting to ₱30,380 is a forwarded balance from previous years. The Accountant stated that this may have been the result of previous errors in recording/posting in the SL and the Accounting Unit has not yet traced records from prior years’ transaction.	



We recommended and Management agreed to strictly require the Accounting Unit to trace the outstanding balance of the Due to Pag-IBIG account under the STF and immediately take appropriate action either by remitting the amount to the HDMF or provide the corresponding journal entries for the corrections/adjustments.





F)	COMPLIANCE WITH THE NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE ACT OF 2013



6)	The College was compliant with the pertinent provisions of the IRR of the National Health Insurance Act of 2003 with total premium remittances during the year amounting to ₱2.10 million except for the prior year’s outstanding liability of ₱463 that remains unremitted and/or unadjusted as of year-end.



				Section 18, Rule III of the Revised IRR of RA No. 7875 as amended by RA No. 9241 and RA No. 10606 or the National Health Insurance Act of 2013 states that:



a)	The member’s monthly contribution shall be deducted and withheld automatically by the employer from the former’s salary, wage or earnings. The premium contributed shall be divided equally between the employer and the employed. The employer’s counterpart shall not, in any manner be charged to the employee.



b)	The monthly premium contribution of employed members shall be remitted by the employer on or before the date prescribed by the corporation.



c)	The remittance of premium contribution by the employer shall be supported by a Remittance List to be submitted regularly to the Corporation.

		Xxx.



For the year under audit, the College has withheld ₱2.07 million and subsequently remitted ₱2.10 million to PhilHealth. Details are as follows: 



Fund Classification

Beginning Balance (₱)

Amount Withheld (₱)

Amount Remitted (₱)

Balance (₱)

General Fund

22,226.50

2,072,829.68

2,095,056.18

    0.00

Special Trust Fund

    462.50

             0.00

            0.00

462.50

IGP

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Total

22,689.00

2,072,829.68

2,095,056.18

462.50



The outstanding liability under the STF amounting to ₱463 is a forwarded balance from previous years. The Accountant stated that this may have been the result of previous errors in recording/posting in the SL and the Accounting Unit has not yet traced records from prior years’ transaction.	



We recommended and Management agreed to strictly require the Accounting Unit to trace the outstanding balance of the Due to PhilHealth account under the Special Trust Fund and immediately take appropriate action either by remitting the amount to the PhilHealth or provide the corresponding journal entries for the corrections/adjustments. 





G)	SUMMARY OF TOTAL SUSPENSIONS, DISALLOWANCES AND CHARGES AS OF YEAR-END



There were no Notice of Suspensions, Disallowances and Charges issued and settled during the year, thus, the balance remained to be ₱1.22 million by year-end.	











Beg. Balance 

As of 

12/31/2019

This Period

January 1 to December 31, 2020

Ending Balance

As of 12/31/2020





NS/ND/NC

NSSDC



Notice of Suspension

₱                0.00

₱                 0.00

₱                0.00

₱                0.00

Notice of Disallowance

1,223,187.76

0.00

0.00

1,223,187.76

Notice of Charge

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Total

₱  1,223,187.76

₱                 0.00

₱                0.00

₱  1,223,187.76



The outstanding balance of disallowance of ₱1.22 million comprises of ₱0.70 million with an on-going appeal while the amount of ₱364,213 is a forwarded balance from year 2008 but details are still being traced by Management and the remaining balance of ₱162,025 is yet to be settled and subject for issuance of a Notice of Finality of Decision.    

26

26







