













----media/image1.jpeg--------media/image2.jpeg--------media/image3.jpeg----

	

	

	Republic of the Philippines

	COMMISSION ON AUDIT

	Regional Office No. X

	Cagayan de Oro City

	

	

	ANNUAL AUDIT REPORT

	

	

	ON THE

	

	

	

	UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY OF SOUTHERN PHILIPPINES (USTsP)

	CLAVERIA CAMPUS

	Claveria, Misamis Oriental

	

	

	

	

	For the Year Ended December 31, 2020



	

	----media/image4.jpeg----Republic of the Philippines

						 COMMISSION ON AUDIT

Regional Office No. X

J.V. Serina Street, Carmen, Cagayan de Oro City



OFFICE OF THE REGIONAL DIRECTOR

----media/image2.jpeg----



March 16, 2021





HON. RONALD L. ADAMAT, Ph.D.

Chairperson, Board of Regents 



----media/image5.jpeg----DR. AMBROSIO B. CULTURA, II

University President 

University of Science and Technology 

     of Southern Philippines (USTsP) 

Lapasan, Cagayan de Oro City



Dear Chairperson Adamat and Dr. Cultura,



We are pleased to transmit the Annual Audit Report on the audit of the University of Science and Technology of Southern Philippines – Claveria Campus, Claveria, Misamis Oriental, for Calendar Year 2020 in compliance with Section 2, Article IX-D of the Philippine Constitution and Section 43 of Presidential Decree No. 1445, otherwise known as “Government Auditing Code of the Philippines”.



The audit was conducted to: (a) ascertain the degree of reliance that may be placed on management’s assertions on the financial statements; (b) determine the propriety of transactions as well as the extent of compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations; (c) recommend agency improvement opportunities; and (d) determine the extent of implementation of prior years’ audit recommendations.



The report consists of Part I - Audited Financial Statements, Part II-Observations and Recommendations, Part III - Status of Implementation of Prior Years’ Audit Recommendations, which were discussed with the concerned management officials and staff, and Part IV - Appendices.



We conducted our audit in accordance with the International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAIs) and we believed that it provided a reasonable basis for the audit results.



The Auditor rendered a modified - qualified opinion on the fairness of presentation of the financial statements due to the following:



1)	----media/image6.jpeg----Purchase of supplies and materials amounting to ₱1,386,852.38 were taken 	up as outright expenses, contrary to Sec. 9, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM), resulting 	in the understatement of the inventory accounts, and overstatement of 	expenses. 



2)	Issuance of semi-expendable furniture and fixtures to the end-user amounting to ₱1,978,575.44 were not recognized as expenses, contrary to Sec. 10, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM), resulting in the understatement of expenses and overstatement of the inventory accounts.



3)		Completed projects recorded as Construction in Progress (CIP) - Building and Other Structures under Fund 01 and 05 amounting to P1,052,089.14 and P 1,141,576.54, respectively, were not reclassified to the appropriate Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) account, contrary to Sec. 8(g), Chapter 10, Volume I of Government Accounting Manual (GAM), thus understating the PPE account and its related accumulated depreciation/ depreciation expenses, and overstating the CIP account.



4)	Cash in Bank account balance was understated by P 322,956.55 due to non-recording of unreleased checks contrary to the provisions of Sec. 56 of Chapter 19, Vol I of Government Accounting Manual (GAM), thus, affecting the reliability of the reported cash in bank accounts as of year- end.



(Prior Years)



1)		Non-dropping of unserviceable properties found on station with total net book value of P1,469,363.81 and failure to request disposal, contrary to paragraphs (c) and (d), Section 40, Chapter 10, Volume I of GAM, thus, overstating the PPE accounts and understating the Expense account.



2)		Physical inventory report for some PPE items amounting to P1,860,766.75 did not tally with the balances per Accounting books of P1,304,369.75, showing a difference of                P 556,397.00, contrary to Sec. 42, Chapter 10, Vol. I of GAM, thus, the accuracy of the recorded PPE is doubtful.



The details of the above and other findings and recommendations which were discussed by the audit team with you and other officials in an exit conference on February 19, 2021 are discussed in detail on Part II of the report.



We request that the recommended measures be implemented and we would appreciate being informed on the actions taken thereon by accomplishing the attached Agency Action Plan and Status of Implementation (AAPSI) form, to be submitted to the Audit Team pursuant to Section 89 of RA 11465, the General Provisions of the General Appropriations Act FY 2020.



We appreciate the invaluable support and cooperation extended by the officials and staff of the Agency to the Audit Team which facilitated the completion of this report.





----media/image6.jpeg----Very truly yours,







CELSO L.  VOCAL			

Director IV

Regional Director





Copy Furnished:





The President of the Philippines

Malacaňang Palace, Manila



The Vice President of the Philippines

Coconut  Palace, F. Maria Guerrero St.

CCP Complex, Pasay City



The President of the Senate

Senate of the Philippines

Roxas Boulevard, Pasay City



The Speaker of the House of Representatives

HOR Complex, Constitutions Hills, Quezon City



The Chairman

Senate Finance Committee

Senate of the Philippines 

Roxas Boulevard, Pasay City



The Chairperson

Appropriation Committee

House of the Representative

Constitution Hills, Quezon City



The Secretary

Department of Budget and Management

General Solano Street

San Miguel, Manila



The Cluster Director

NGS, Cluster – 5, COA 

Commonwealth Avenue, Quezon City



The Supervising Auditor

NGS – SUCs and Other SAA

COA Region X, Cagayan de Oro City



The Audit Team Leader

Team R0-10-01, NGS SUCs and Other SAA

COA Region X, Cagayan de Oro City



File























----media/image7.jpeg----UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 

OF SOUTHERN PHILIPPINES – CLAVERIA CAMPUS

Claveria, Misamis Oriental



AGENCY ACTION PLAN and

	STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION (AAPSI)

	Audit Observations and Recommendations

	For the Calendar Year 2020

	As of _________________



Ref.

Audit Observation

Audit Recommendation

Agency Action Plan

Status of Implementation

Reason for Partial/Non- Implemen-tation, if applicable

Action Taken/ Action to be taken







Action Plan

	Person/ Dept. Responsible

Target Implementation Date

















From

To









AAR 2020 Finding No. 1





Purchase of supplies and materials amounting to       ₱1,386,852.38 were taken up as outright expenses, contrary to Sec. 9, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM), resulting in the understatement of the inventory accounts, and overstatement of expenses. 



We recommend that management shall undertake the following measures:



a)	Prepare adjusting journal entries to correct the entries made at the time of payment; retrieve the RSMIs on the above-procured supplies and prepare adjusting JEVs to record the expense portion thereof; and



b)	Strictly adhere to the provisions of Sec. 9, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of GAM.

















AAR 2020 Finding No. 2





Issuance of semi-expendable furniture and fixtures to the end-user amounting to ₱1,978,575.44 were not recognized as expenses, contrary to Sec. 10, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM), resulting in the understatement of expenses and overstatement of the inventory accounts.



We recommend that management shall undertake the following measures:



a)		Prepare adjusting entries to correct the books of accounts, and



b)		Strictly adhere to the provisions of Sec. 10, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of Government Accounting Manual (GAM).   

















AAR 2020 Finding No. 3



Completed projects recorded as Construction in Progress (CIP)- Building and Other Structures under Funds 01 and 05 amounting to ₱1,052,089.14 and  ₱1,141,576.54, respectively, were not reclassified to the appropriate Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) account, contrary to Sec. 8(g), Chapter 10, Volume I of Government Accounting Manual (GAM), thus understating the PPE account and its related accumulated depreciation/depreciation expense, and overstating the CIP account.





We recommend that management undertake the following:



c)		Communicate with the contractor on the existence of outstanding payables relative to the fully-completed projects at hand;



d)		Issue Certificate of Completion for projects which has been satisfactorily 100% completed;



e)		Compute the depreciation expense and accordingly, prepare all the necessary adjusting entries for the affected accounts.



















AAR 2020 Finding No. 4





Five (5) Infrastructure projects with a total contract amount of ₱137,244,187.40 remained unfinished despite the expiration of contract time contrary to the agreed terms and conditions of the contracts, thereby depriving the school constituents of its immediate and maximum utilization had these projects been implemented.





We recommend that the management shall undertake the following measures:



a)	Send demand letters/ notices to contractors to expedite the project completion, otherwise, terminate the contract, if warranted, in accordance with Annex “I” of CY 2016 Revised IRR of RA 9184;



b)	Strictly monitor and supervise the accomplishments of the contractors, particularly on the incurrence of negative slippage/s; and



c)	Impose liquidated damages for every day of delay as well as sanctions set forth under Section 68 and Annex “I” of Revised CY 2016 RA 9184 and its IRR.



















AAR 2020 Finding No. 5





Cash in Bank account balance was understated by ₱322,956.55 due to non-recording of unreleased checks contrary to the provisions of Sec. 56 of Chapter 19, Vol I of Government Accounting Manual (GAM), thus, affecting the reliability of the reported cash in bank accounts as of year- end.





We recommend that management direct the Accountant to draw JEV to restore the cash and book up liabilities to present fairly the recorded cash in bank and accounts payable accounts. 



















2018 AAR,

FindingNo. 1,





	1)	Non-dropping of unserviceable properties found on station and failure to request disposal, contrary to paragraphs (c) and (d), Sec. 40, Chapter 10, Volume I of GAM, thus, overstating the PPE accounts and understating the Expense account; and



	2)	Physical inventory report for some PPE items amounting to                       ₱1,860,766.75 did not tally with the balances per Accounting books of             ₱1,304,369.75, showing a difference of                        ₱556,397.00, contrary to Sec. 42, Chapter 10, Vol. I of GAM, thus, the accuracy of the recorded PPE is doubtful.





1)	Require the Supply Officer to submit a listing of all unserviceable properties subject for disposal; and  















2)	Direct the Accounting and Supply Units to conduct a reconciliation of PPE per books and physical inventory to have a reliable balance and fair presentation of financial statements.



















2018 AAR Finding No. 5



Non-implementation of Establishment of Irrigation and Water System through Design-and-Build Scheme Project with a contract amount of ₱33,928,187.36, thereby, depriving the beneficiaries thereof of the expected benefits and allowing government funds to remain idle for more than a year, contrary to Sec. 2 of PD 1445 and Sec. 7, Annex “G” of CY 2016 Revised IRR of RA 9184.





Expedite implementation of the project; otherwise, terminate the contract, if warranted, in accordance with Annex “I” of CY 2016 Revised IRR of RA 9184.



















2014 AAR Finding No. 2



A total of ₱1.190 million loans granted to 238 MOSCAT students from CHED SAFE loan remained uncollected due to failure of imposing the sanctions against the defaulting students which resulted in limiting the availment instead of expanding the number of beneficiaries of the loan program.





We recommended to management to require the Finance Department to send collection/demand letters addressed to the parents of loan grantees with due and demandable accounts as the notarized promissory note declared the parents to have full responsibility in the repayment of unpaid loan and utilize all forms of social media to inform all grantees of their overdue SAFE accounts.



















2014 AAR Finding No. 3



The continued existence of dormant receivables of ₱5,362,031.48 representing unpaid tuition fees from various defunct sponsors and receivables from patrons of the College income generating projects (IGPs) casts doubts on its collectability and validity of the reported balance.  

	



We reiterate our previous year recommendation that the College President require the Accountant to:



1)	Analyze the dormant accounts amounting to ₱5.362 million and identify the account which collections are still feasible and send demand letters without delay; and  



2)	After exhausting all possible legal means to demand settlement, request authority to write off of the dormant account balances from the Commission Audit following the guidelines prescribed in COA Circular No. 97-001 duly approved by the Board of Trustees to reflect the correct value of the account.



















Agency sign-off:





___________________________________________						_____________________

             Name and Position of Agency Official							                     Date





Note: Status of Implementation may either be (a) Full Implemented, (b) Ongoing, (c) Not Implemented, (d) Partially Implemented, or (e) Delayed

----media/image8.gif----Republic of the Philippines

COMMISSION ON AUDIT

Regional Office No. 10

J.V. Serina St., Carmen, Cagayan de Oro City



OFFICE OF THE SUPERVISING AUDITOR

NGS – State Universities and Colleges & Other NGS Stand Alone Agencies





March 15, 2021





MEMORANDUM FOR:



ATTY. CELSO L. VOCAL

Regional Director

Commission on Audit

Regional Office No. X

Cagayan de Oro City



In compliance with Section 2, Article IX-D of the Philippine Constitution and Section 43 of Presidential Decree No. 1445, otherwise known as Government Auditing Code of the Philippines, we have audited the accounts and operations of the University of Science and Technology of Southern Philippines, Claveria Campus, Claveria, Misamis Oriental for the year ended December 31, 2020.



The audit was conducted to (a) ascertain the degree of reliance that may be placed on management’s assertions on the financial statements; (b) determine the propriety of transactions as well as the extent of compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations; (c) recommend agency improvement opportunities; and (d) determine the extent of implementation of prior years’ audit recommendations.



The audit report consists of Part I – Audited Financial Statements, Part II – Observations and Recommendations, Part III – Status of Implementation of Prior Years’ Audit Recommendations, which were discussed with the officials and staff concerned on   February 19, 2021, and Part IV – Appendices. Management comments were included in the appropriate portion of the report.



A modified – qualified opinion was rendered on the fairness of the presentation of the financial statements of which the observations affecting the financial statements were discussed in Part II of the audit report.



Our audit was conducted in accordance with International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAIs) and we believed that the audit evidence we have obtained provides reasonable basis for the results of the audit.  

----media/image9.jpeg----	



						

MARYVILLE S. LABITAD

State Auditor V

Supervising Auditor

	----media/image8.gif----Republic of the Philippines

COMMISSION ON AUDIT

University of Science and Technology of Southern Philippines

Claveria Campus, Claveria Misamis Oriental



OFFICE OF THE AUDIT TEAM LEADER

Audit Team R10-01, NGS SUCs and other NGS Stand Alone Agencies



February 24, 2021



	

MEMORANDUM FOR:



MARYVILLE S. LABITAD

Supervising Auditor

NGS-SUCs & Other Stand Alone Agencies

Commission on Audit

Regional Office No. X

Cagayan de Oro City





In compliance with Section 2, Article IX-D of the Philippine Constitution and Section 43 of Presidential Decree No. 1445, otherwise known as Government Auditing Code of the Philippines, we have audited the accounts and operations of the University of Science and Technology of Southern Philippines, Claveria Campus, Claveria, Misamis Oriental for the year ended December 31, 2020.



The audit was conducted to (a) ascertain the degree of reliance that may be placed on management’s assertions on the financial statements; (b) determine the propriety of transactions as well as the extent of compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations; (c) recommend agency improvement opportunities; and (d) determine the extent of implementation of prior years’ audit recommendations.



The audit report consists of Part I – Audited Financial Statements, Part II – Observations and Recommendations, Part III – Status of Implementation of Prior Years’ Audit Recommendations, which were discussed with the officials and staff concerned on   February 19, 2021, and Part IV – Appendices. Management comments were included in the appropriate portion of the report.



A modified – qualified opinion was rendered on the fairness of the presentation of the financial statements of which the observations affecting the financial statements were discussed in Part II of the audit report.



----media/image10.jpeg----Our audit was conducted in accordance with International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAIs) and we believed that the audit evidence we have obtained provides reasonable basis for the results of the audit.  			





EVERETT T. LIM

State Auditor IV      

Audit Team Leader





EXECUTIVE SUMMARY





A.    INTRODUCTION





The University of Science and Technology of Southern Philippines (USTsP)- Claveria Campus formerly known as Misamis Oriental State College of Agriculture and Technology (MOSCAT) adopted new identification by virtue of Republic Act 10919 held in the Senate and House of Representative on July 22, 2015. This act establishes the University of Science and Technology of Southern Philippines, providing for the purpose the amalgamation of the Mindanao University of Science and Technology (MUST) and the Misamis Oriental State College of Agriculture and Technology (MOSCAT) and appropriating funds therefore.



It is the declared policy of the state to establish, maintain, and support a complete, adequate and integrated system of higher education relevant to the needs of the people and society, with primary focus on research and development for science and technology.



General Mandate shall provide advance education, higher technological, professional and advance instruction in mathematics, science, technology, engineering, agriculture, and advance research and extension work in human resource development in critical science and technology skills and competencies required for global competitiveness. 



USTsP- Claveria Campus started as a municipal high school in 1963 and became the Claveria National Rural High School by the passage of Republic Act 3781. By virtue of Batas Pambansa Bilang 402 which was enacted on June 10, 1983 it was converted to MOSCAT.



The administration of USTP-Claveria Campus is vested in the Chancellor insofar as authorized by the Board of Regents (BOR).



Scope of Audit and its Objectives



The audit covered the financial transactions of USTsP – Claveria Campus for calendar year ended December 31, 2020.  The audit was primarily aimed at ascertaining the level of assurance that may be placed on management’s assertions on the financial statements; recommend agency improvement opportunities; and determine the extent of implementation of prior year’s audit recommendations.  On a test basis, it also included a review on the propriety of disbursements and other financial transactions to determine whether or not the transactions were made in accordance with existing, laws, rules and regulations. 





B.   FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS 



The total current year appropriations of the Campus authorized by General Appropriations Act (GAA) for fiscal year 2020 was P114,332,000.00 with a total allotments of P181,827,223.00. Of which, a total amount of P176,839,223.30 was obligated, and only P143,022,248.33 was disbursed. The Campus also had a continuing appropriations of P3,681,454.94.



Under Internally Generated (Fund 05) and Business Related (Fund 06) Funds, the Campus showed total approved budgets of P57,740,000.00 and P11,154,000.00, with  budget allocations of P43,545,713.95 and  P10,212,588.04; and only P31,409,767.52 and P9,731,234.45 were disbursed, respectively.



On the other hand, the Campus collected P4,608,014.46 or 92% lower than its total target collection for FY 2020 of P60,315,000.00, under Internally Generated Fund attributed from payment of tuition and other school Fees. Also, under Business Related Funds, the Campus fell short by 12%, or P 9,819,516.56, from its target collection of P 11,154,000.00.



The Campus’ comparative financial position and financial performance showed an increase of its Assets and Net Income by 18% and 0.3%, respectively, for this fiscal year, 2020. Details shown below: (rounded to nearest peso)



Particulars

2020

2019

Increase /

%







(Decrease)



A.  Financial Condition









      Assets

 ₱  368,116,615 

 ₱ 317,611,193 

50,505,422

16%

      Liabilities

 36,992,057 

 37,531,356 

 (539,299)

-1%

Net Assets/ Equity

 331,124,558 

 280,079,837 

51,044,721

18%

B1.  Sources of Funds









      Subsidy from the  National     Government- Net of Reversion

 131,077,376 

 119,052,522 

12,024,854

10%

      Other Income

 78,883,090 

 69,748,798 

9,134,292

13%

Total Income

 209,960,466 

 188,801,320 

21,159,146

11%

B2.  Application of Funds









Personal Services

 70,032,079 

 63,798,797 

6,233,282

10%

MOOE

 52,358,118 

 40,668,625 

11,689,493

29%

Financial Expenses

0.00

 2,530 

 (2,530)

-100%

Direct Costs

 5,114,444 

 4,940,406 

174,038

4%

Non-Cash Expenses

 6,765,965 

 3,901,035 

2,864,930

73%

Total Expenses

 134,270,606 

 113,311,393 

20,959,213

18%

Excess of Income Over Expenses

 ₱75,689,860 

 ₱75,489,927 

 199,933 

0%

	



A)	OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS   



The total student population (College and Graduate Studies) for 2020 registered at 5,574 for the first, second semesters of AY 2020-21 and summer of 2020 for USTP-Claveria campus.











Campus

Summer 2020

1st Semester SY 2020-2021

2nd Semester SY 2020-2021

Total

Claveria









     College

556

2,573

2270

5399

     Graduate Studies

29

77

69

175

Total

585

2,650

2,339

5,574





The USTsP-Claveria has three Organizational Outcomes (OOs)/Performance Indicators (PIs): Higher Education Program, Research Program and Technical Advisory Extension Program. The University reported the following major accomplishments per OOs and PIs for CY 2020:



Organizational Outcomes/

Performance Indicators

Targets

Accomplishments

Percentage

Higher Education Program

Outcome Indicators







Percentage of graduates (2 years prior) that are employed

78%

91.54%

(292/319 )

117%

Output Indicators







Percentage of undergraduate student population enrolled in CHED-identified and RDC-identified priority programs

100%

100%

(2,573/2,573)

100%

Percentage of undergraduate programs with accreditation

100%

100%

(6/6)

100%

Research Program

Outcome Indicator







Number of research outputs in the last three years utilized by the industry or by other beneficiaries

3

3

100%

Output Indicators







Number of research outputs completed within the year

24

28

117%

Percentage of research outputs published in internationally-referred or CHED recognized journal within the year



30%

27.78%

(20/72)

93%

Technical Advisory Extension Program

Outcome Indicator







Number of active partnerships with LGUs,industries, NGOs, NGAs, SMEs, and other stakeholders as a result of extension activities

6

6

100%

Output Indicators







Number of trainees weighted by the length of training

3781

4,148

110%

Number of extension programs organized and supported consistent with the SUC's mandated and priority programs

1

1

100%

Percentage of beneficiaries who rate the training course/s  and advisory services as satisfactory or higher in terms of quality and relevance

75%

92.27%

(3,553/3,579)

132%





B)	INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS



The Auditor rendered a modified – qualified opinion on the fairness of the presentation of the financial statements of the University of Science and Technology of Southern Philippines – Claveria Campus for calendar year ended December 31, 2020, due to the following current and prior years’ deficiencies:



(Current Year)



1)	Purchase of supplies and materials amounting to ₱1,386,852.38 were taken 	up as outright expenses, contrary to Sec. 9, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM), resulting 	in the understatement of the inventory accounts, and overstatement of 	expenses. 



2)	Issuance of semi-expendable furniture and fixtures to the end-user amounting to ₱1,978,575.44 were not recognized as expenses, contrary to Sec. 10, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM), resulting in the understatement of expenses and overstatement of the inventory accounts.



3)	Completed projects recorded as Construction in Progress (CIP) - Building and Other Structures under Fund 01 and 05 amounting to ₱1,052,089.14 and ₱1,141,576.54, respectively, were not reclassified to the appropriate Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) account, contrary to Sec. 8(g), Chapter 10, Volume I of Government Accounting Manual (GAM), thus understating the PPE account and its related accumulated depreciation/ depreciation expenses, and overstating the CIP account.



4)	Cash in Bank account balance was understated by ₱322,956.55 due to non-recording of unreleased checks contrary to the provisions of Sec. 56 of Chapter 19, Vol I of Government Accounting Manual (GAM), thus, affecting the reliability of the reported cash in bank accounts as of year- end.



(Prior Years)



5)	Non-dropping of unserviceable properties found on station with total net book value of ₱1,469,363.81 and failure to request disposal, contrary to paragraphs (c) and (d), Section 40, Chapter 10, Volume I of GAM, thus, overstating the PPE accounts and understating the Expense account



6)	Physical inventory report for some PPE items amounting to ₱1,860,766.75 did not tally with the balances per Accounting books of ₱1,304,369.75, showing a difference of                P 556,397.00, contrary to Sec. 42, Chapter 10, Vol. I of GAM, thus, the accuracy of the recorded PPE is doubtful.



E.    SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT AUDIT OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS



In addition, the following is a summary of significant observations and recommendations in the audit and/or evaluation of the university operation which needs immediate action. These and other audit observations and recommendations are fully discussed in Part II of the report and were discussed by the Audit Team with you and other officials in an exit conference on February 19, 2021.



1)		Five (5) Infrastructure projects with a total contract amount of ₱137,244,187.40 remained unfinished despite the expiration of contract time contrary to the agreed terms and conditions of the contracts, thereby depriving the school constituents of its immediate and maximum utilization had these projects been implemented.



We recommended the management undertake the following measures:



a)	Send demand letters/ notices to contractors to expedite the project completion;



b)	Strictly monitor and supervise the accomplishments of the contractors, particularly on the incurrence of negative slippage/s; and



c)	Impose liquidated damages for every day of delay as well as sanctions set forth under Section 68 and Annex “I” of Revised CY 2016 RA 9184 and its IRR.





F.    STATUS OF SETTLEMENT OF ACCOUNTS



As of December 31, 2020, the Statement of Audit Suspensions Disallowances and Charges (SASDC) reflected total suspension of P5,864,625.31 and total disallowances of P1,470,859.13 as shown below:



Issuance

Beginning Balance

This Period

(January 1 to December 31, 2020)

Ending Balance



December 31, 2019

Issued

Settled

December 31, 2020

Notice of Charge

P                0.00

P0.00

P0.00

P               0.00

Notice of Suspension

17,915.20

  49,297,918.29 

  43,451,208.18 

5,864,625.31

Notice of Disallowance

1,604,118.33

6,769.12         

140,028.32             

1,470,859.13

Total

P1,622,033.53

P49,304,687.41  

P43,591,236.50

P7,335,484.44









	

F.    STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF PRIOR YEARS’ AUDIT RECOMMENDATIONS



As of December 31, 2020, there were eight (8) audit recommendations contained in the CY 2018 and 2014 Audit Annual Reports. Of which, two (2) were fully implemented; four (4) were partially implemented; and the remaining two (2) were not implemented

TABLE OF CONTENTS







Particulars 						Page



Independent Auditor’s Report						1-3



Statement of Management Responsibility for 

Financial Statements							4



Part	I	Financial Statements					

		

Statement of Financial Position					5-12

		Statement of Financial Performance					13-18

		Statement of Changes in Net Assets/Equity				19

		Statement of Cash Flows					   	20-25

		Statement of Comparison of Budget and Actual Amounts		26

		Notes to Financial Statements					27-57







Part	II	Audit Observations and Recommendations			58-69

			





Part	III	Status of Implementation of Prior					70-73

		Years’ Audit Recommendations					







Part	IV	Appendices								74-83

----media/image8.gif----

Republic of the Philippines

		COMMISSION ON AUDIT              

		Regional Office No. X

J.V. Serina Street, Carmen, Cagayan de Oro City

		







INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT



HON. RONALD L. ADAMAT, Ph.D.

Chairperson, Board of Regents 

University of Science and Technology of Southern Philippines (USTsP)-

   Claveria Campus

Claveria, Misamis Oriental



DR. AMBROSIO B. CULTURA, II

University President 

University of Science and Technology 

of Southern Philippines (USTsP)





Modified – Qualified Opinion



We have audited the financial statements of University of Science and Technology of Southern Philippines (USTsP) – Claveria Campus, which comprise the Statement of Financial Position as of December 31, 2020 and the Statement of Financial Performance, Statement of Changes in Net Assets/Equity, Statement of Cash Flows and Statement of Comparison of Budget and Actual Amounts for the year then ended, and Notes to the Financial Statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies.



In our opinion, except for the effects of the matter described in the Basis of Modified – Qualified Opinion section of our report, the accompanying financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the University as at December 31, 2020, and its financial performance, its cash flows, and its comparison of budget and actual amounts for the year then ended in accordance with International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSASs).





Basis for Modified – Qualified Opinion



	As discussed in Part II of this report, the significant deficiencies are the following:

	

1)	Purchase of supplies and materials amounting to ₱1,386,852.38 were taken 	up as outright expenses, contrary to Sec. 9, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM), resulting 	in the understatement of the inventory accounts, and overstatement of 	expenses. 



2)	Issuance of semi-expendable furniture and fixtures to the end-user amounting to ₱1,978,575.44 were not recognized as expenses, contrary to Sec. 10, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM), resulting in the understatement of expenses and overstatement of the inventory accounts.



3)		Completed projects recorded as Construction in Progress (CIP) - Building and Other Structures under Fund 01 and 05 amounting to ₱1,052,089.14 and ₱1,141,576.54, respectively, were not reclassified to the appropriate Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) account, contrary to Sec. 8(g), Chapter 10, Volume I of Government Accounting Manual (GAM), thus understating the PPE account and its related accumulated depreciation/ depreciation expenses, and overstating the CIP account.



4)	Cash in Bank account balance was understated by ₱322,956.55 due to non-recording of unreleased checks contrary to the provisions of Sec. 56 of Chapter 19, Vol I of Government Accounting Manual (GAM), thus, affecting the reliability of the reported cash in bank accounts as of year- end.



(Prior Years)



5)	Non-dropping of unserviceable properties found on station with total net book value of ₱1,469,363.81 and failure to request disposal, contrary to paragraphs (c) and (d), Section 40, Chapter 10, Volume I of GAM, thus, overstating the PPE accounts and understating the Expense account.

	

6)		Physical inventory report for some PPE items amounting to ₱1,860,766.75 did not tally with the balances per Accounting books of ₱1,304,369.75, showing a difference of                ₱556,397.00, contrary to Sec. 42, Chapter 10, Vol. I of GAM, thus, the accuracy of the recorded PPE is doubtful.



We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAIs). Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of our report. We are independent of the agency in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements, and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our qualified opinion.



Key Audit Matters 



Except for the matter described in the Basis for Modified – Qualified Opinion section, we have determined that there are no other key audit matters to communicate in our report. 



Responsibilities of Management and Those Charged with Governance for the Financial Statements



Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of these financial statements in accordance with IPSASs, and for such internal control as management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statement that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. 



Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the University’s financial reporting process.



Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of Financial Statements



Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not   guarantee that an audit   conducted in accordance with ISSAIs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements. 







COMMISSION ON AUDIT



----media/image9.jpeg----BY:





MARYVILLE S. LABITAD

State Auditor V

Supervising Auditor



March 16, 2021

















































----media/image11.jpeg----University of Science and Technology 

Of Southern Philippines – Claveria Campus

Claveria, Misamis Oriental









STATEMENT OF MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY FOR FINANCIAL STATEMENTS





The management of UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY OF SOUTHERN PHILIPPINES (USTSP) – Claveria Campus is responsible for all information and representations contained in the accompanying combined Statement of Financial Position as of December 31, 2020 and the related Statements of Financial Performance, Cash Flow Statement, Statement of Comparison of Budget and Actual Amounts and Statement of Changes in Net Assets/Equity for the period ended. The financial statements have been prepared in conformity with the Philippine Public Sector Accounting Standards and reflect amounts that are based on the estimates and informed judgment of management with an appropriate consideration to materiality.



In this regard, the management maintains a system of accounting and reporting which provides for the necessary internal controls to ensure that transactions are properly authorized and recorded, assets are safeguarded against unauthorized use or disposition and liabilities are recognized.







----media/image12.jpeg----





JANELLE B. ROJAS

----media/image13.jpeg----Accountant III

Date Signed: 

----media/image14.jpeg----





DR. AMBROSIO B. CULTURA II

----media/image13.jpeg----University System President

Date Signed: 



























































PART   I  -  FINANCIAL  STATEMENTS





----media/image15.emf----





		

----media/image16.emf----

----media/image17.emf----



----media/image18.emf----







----media/image19.emf----

----media/image20.emf----





----media/image21.emf----



----media/image22.emf----



















































----media/image23.emf----































----media/image24.emf----

----media/image25.emf--------media/image26.emf----



----media/image27.emf----

----media/image28.emf----





















































----media/image29.emf----



































----media/image30.emf----

----media/image31.emf----























































----media/image32.emf--------media/image33.emf----



----media/image34.emf----



----media/image35.emf----







































































----media/image36.emf----





































----media/image37.jpeg----  UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

OF SOUTHERN PHILIPPINES – CLAVERIA CAMPUS

Claveria, Misamis Oriental





CONSOLIDATED NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

December 31, 2020



1)	General Information/Agency Profile



The USTP-Claveria Campus is a State University which started as Claveria National Rural High School (CNRHS) in 1963. It was converted into a state college known to be the Misamis Oriental State College of Agriculture and Technology by virtue of Batas Pambansa Bilang 402 which was enacted on June 10, 1983.  Republic Act No. 10919 established the University of Science and Technology of Southern Philippines (USTP), providing for the purpose the Amalgamation of the Mindanao University of Science and Technology (MUST) and the Misamis Oriental State College of Agriculture and Technology (MOSCAT), established on August 16, 2016. The mandate of USTP is to provide advance education, higher technological, professional and advance instruction in mathematics, science, technology, engineering, agriculture, and advance research and extension work in human resource development in critical science and technology skills and competencies required for global competitiveness. The Agency's registered office is located in MOSCAT, Claveria, Misamis Oriental.



USTP’s mission is to bring the world of work (industry) into the actual higher education and training of students, offer entrepreneurs the opportunity to maximize their business potentials through a gamut of services from product conceptualization to commercialization, and contribute significantly to the National Development Goals of food security and energy sufficiency through technology solutions.



Claveria campus boasts of a 101.37-hectare rich agricultural land. USTP’s main campus will eventually be located at the institution’s 295.14-hectare property in Alubijid, Misamis Oriental.



USTP’s Three-Phased Agenda



To effectively and efficiently carry out its mission, the implementation of Republic Act 10919 or the USTP Charter is executed in three phases: Phase 1 (2017-2020) Laying Down the Foundations of the University, Phase 2 (2021-2025) Strengthening the S & T Academe -Economy Ecology, and Phase 3 (2026-2030) Attaining International Recognition as an S & T University.



Phase 1 Agendum: Laying Down the Foundations

	

Phase 1, which begins in 2017, consists of harnessing available human and physical resources of the amalgamated SUCs, namely, the Mindanao University of Science and Technology and the Misamis Oriental State College of Agriculture and Technology, to build the foundations upon which the USTP will eventually flourish. Specifically, the academic framework and processes in instruction and research will be established with the active participation of the industries; the University’s faculty specializations and research will be re-examined and re-aligned to match the prospective needs of the university. At the same time, the University will capitalize and build on existing Centers of Excellence and Development as bases for building its niche in Philippine higher education. Research Centers will become the foci upon which research and extension activities shall be based. The Physical Development Plan of the Technoparks shall have been completed and potential private sector participation shall have been secured in this Phase.



Phase 2 Agendum: Strengthening the S&T Academe-Economy Ecology



Phase 2, which begins in 2021, sees the full infrastructure development of the Technoparks and the strengthening of the academic systems and processes which strongly tie up industry engagements in the spectrum of curricular programs, offerings and research undertakings in the University. These are manifested not only in the manpower development aspect of the three-fold mandate of the University but as well as in the upscaling of the provisions of technology solutions and innovations to the industry partners; and positively influencing the local economy and the society in general.



Phase 3 Agendum: Attaining International Recognition as an S&T University



Phase 3, initiating in 2026, witnesses the University’s entry in the international higher education arena with internationally-benchmarked curricular offerings; producing locally-responsive yet internationally acknowledged research outputs as marks of good scholarship, and a seamless environment for a synergistic learning and business/industry interactions as a general framework of operations.



Pursuant to the University Charter, the RA 10919, the governing board of the University shall be the Board of Regents, hereinafter referred to as the Board, which shall be composed of the following:



a)	The Chairperson of the CHED, Chairperson;

b)	The President of the University, Vice Chairperson;

c)	The Chancellors of Cagayan de Oro and Claveria Campuses, members;

d)	The Chairperson of the Committee on Education, Arts and Culture of the 

Senate, member;

e)	The Chairperson of the Committee on Higher and Technical Education of 			the House of Representatives, member;

f)	The Director-General of the National Economic and Development 	Authority 	(NEDA), member;

g)	The Secretary of the Department of Science and Technology (DOST), member;

h)	The President of the federation of faculty associations of the University, member;

i)	The President of the federation of the student councils of the University, member;

j)	The President of the federation of alumni associations of the University, member;

k)	Four (4) prominent Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) of duly recognized national or multinational corporations who have distinguished themselves in the fields of specialized of the University or who have entered into a partnership with the University, members and  

l)	Two (2) prominent academicians in the Philippines who have distinguished themselves in the fields of specialization of the University through their publication and track record in research.



2)	Statement of Compliance and Basis of Preparation of Financial Statements 



The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with and comply with the Philippine Public Sector Accounting Standards (PPSAS) issued by the Commission on Audit per COA Resolution No. 2014-003 dated January 24, 2014.



The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on the basis of historical cost, unless stated otherwise.  The Statement of Cash Flows is prepared using the direct method. 









3)	Summary of Significant Accounting Policies



    3.1  Basis of accounting



The consolidated financial statements are prepared on an accrual basis in accordance with the Philippine Public Sector Accounting Standards (PPSAS). 













3.2  Financial instruments



a)	Financial assets



Initial recognition and measurement



Financial assets within the scope of PPSAS 29-Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement are classified as financial assets at fair value through surplus or deficit, held-to-maturity investments, loans and receivables or available-for-sale financial assets, as appropriate.  The USTP-Claveria determines the classification of its financial assets at initial recognition.



The USTP-Claveria financial assets include: loans and other receivables.



  

Subsequent measurement



The subsequent measurement of financial assets depends on their classification.





Loans and receivables



Loans and receivables are non-derivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market. After initial measurement, such financial assets are subsequently measured at amortized cost using the effective interest method, less impairment. Amortized cost is calculated by taking into account any discount or premium on acquisition and fees or costs that are an integral part of the effective interest rate. Losses arising from impairment are recognized in the surplus or deficit.









Derecognition



The USTP-Claveria derecognizes a financial asset or, where applicable, a part of a financial asset or part of a similar financial assets when:



--	The rights to receive cash flows from the asset have expired or is waived



--	The USTP-Claveria has transferred its rights to receive cash flows from the asset or has assumed an obligation to pay the received cash flows in full without material delay to a third party; and either: (a) the USTP-Claveria has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset; or (b) the USTP-Claveria has neither transferred nor retained substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset, but has transferred control of the asset.





Impairment of financial assets



The USTP-Claveria assesses at each reporting date whether there is objective evidence that a financial asset or a group of financial assets is impaired.  A financial asset or a group of financial assets is deemed to be impaired if, and only if, there is objective evidence of impairment as a result of one or more events that has occurred after the initial recognition of the asset (an incurred “loss event”) and that loss event has an impact on the estimated future cash flows of the financial asset or the group of financial assets that can be reliably estimated.  



Evidence of impairment may include the following indicators:



--	The debtors or a group of debtors are experiencing significant financial difficulty



--	Default or delinquency in interest or principal payments



--	The probability that debtors will enter bankruptcy or other financial reorganization



--	Observable data indicates a measurable decrease in estimated future cash flows (e.g. changes in arrears or economic conditions that correlate with defaults)





b.  Financial liabilities



Initial recognition and measurement



Financial liabilities within the scope of PPSAS 29 are classified as financial liabilities at fair value through surplus or deficit or loans and borrowings, as appropriate.  The entity determines the classification of its financial liabilities at initial recognition.



All financial liabilities are recognized initially at fair value.



The USTP-Claveria’s financial liabilities include trade and other payables.















Subsequent measurement



The measurement of financial liabilities depends on their classification.



Derecognition



A financial liability is derecognized when the obligation under the liability is discharged or cancelled or expires. 





3.3  Cash and cash equivalents



Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash at bank. 





    3.4  Inventories



Inventory is measured at cost upon initial recognition. To the extent that inventory was received through non-exchange transactions (for no cost or for a nominal cost), the cost of the inventory is its fair value at the date of acquisition.



After initial recognition, inventory is measured at the lower of cost and net realizable value. However, to the extent that a class of inventory is distributed or deployed at no charge or for a nominal charge, that class of inventory is measured at the lower of cost and current replacement cost.



Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of operations, less the estimated costs of completion and the estimated costs necessary to make the sale, exchange, or distribution. 



Inventories are recognized as an expense when deployed for utilization or consumption in the ordinary course of operations of the USTP-Claveria.





3.5  Property, Plant and Equipment



Recognition



An item is recognized as property, plant, and equipment (PPE) if it meets the characteristics and recognition criteria as a PPE.



The characteristics of PPE are as follows:



--	tangible items;



--	are held for use in the production or supply of goods or services, for rental to others, or for administrative purposes; and



--	are expected to be used during more than one reporting period.

An item of PPE is recognized as an asset if:  



--	It is probable that future economic benefits or service potential associated with the item will flow to the entity; and



--	The cost or fair value of the item can be measured reliably.













Measurement at Recognition



An item recognized as property, plant, and equipment is measured at cost.



A PPE acquired through non-exchange transaction is measured at its fair value as at the date of acquisition.



The cost of the PPE is the cash price equivalent or, for PPE acquired through non-exchange transaction its cost is its fair value as at recognition date. 



Cost includes the following:



--	Its purchase price, including import duties and non-refundable purchase taxes, after deducting trade discounts and rebates;



--	expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the items; and



--	initial estimate of the costs of dismantling and removing the item and restoring the site on which it is located, the obligation for which an entity incurs either when the item is acquired, or as a consequence of having used the item during a particular period for purposes other than to produce inventories during that period.









Measurement After Recognition



After recognition, all property, plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses. 







When significant parts of property, plant and equipment are required to be replaced at intervals, the [Name of the entity] recognizes such parts as individual assets with specific useful lives and depreciates them accordingly. Likewise, when a major repair/replacement is done, its cost is recognized in the carrying amount of the plant and equipment as a replacement if the recognition criteria are satisfied. 



All other repair and maintenance costs are recognized as expense in surplus or deficit  as incurred. 







Depreciation



Each part of an item of property, plant, and equipment with a cost that is significant in relation to the total cost of the item is depreciated separately.



The depreciation charge for each period is recognized as expense unless it is included in the cost of another asset.





Initial Recognition of Depreciation



Depreciation of an asset begins when it is available for use such as when it is in the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management.  



For simplicity and to avoid proportionate computation, the depreciation is for one month if the PPE is available for use on or before the 15th of the month.  However, if the PPE is available for use after the 15th of the month, depreciation is for the succeeding month.





Depreciation Method



The straight-line method of depreciation is adopted unless another method is more appropriate for agency operation.





       Estimated Useful Life



The USTP-Claveria uses the Schedule on the Estimated Useful Life of PPE by classification prepared by COA.





The USTP-Claveria uses a residual value equivalent to at least five percent (5%) of the cost of the PPE.





Impairment 



An asset’s carrying amount is written down to its recoverable amount, or recoverable service amount, if the asset’s carrying amount is greater than its estimated recoverable service amount.









Derecognition



The USTP-Claveria derecognizes items of property, plant and equipment and/or any significant part of an asset upon disposal or when no future economic benefits or service potential is expected from its continuing use. Any gain or loss arising on derecognition of the asset (calculated as the difference between the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset) is included in the surplus or deficit when the asset is derecognized.







3.6  Changes in accounting policies and estimates



The USTP-Claveria recognizes the effects of changes in accounting policy retrospectively. The effects of changes in accounting policy were applied prospectively if retrospective application is impractical.



The USTP-Claveria recognizes the effects of changes in accounting estimates prospectively by including in surplus or deficit.



The USTP-Claveria correct material prior period errors retrospectively in the first set of financial statements authorized for issue after their discovery by:



Restating the comparative amounts for prior period(s) presented in which the error occurred; or 



If the error occurred before the earliest prior period presented, restating the opening balances of assets, liabilities and net assets/equity for the earliest prior period presented.





3.7  Revenue from non-exchange transactions



Recognition and Measurement of Assets from Non-Exchange Transactions



An inflow of resources from a non-exchange transaction, other than services in-kind, that meets the definition of an asset were recognized as an asset if the following criteria were met:



--	It is probable that the future economic benefits or service potential associated with the asset will flow to the entity; and



--	The fair value of the asset can be measured reliably.



An asset acquired through a non-exchange transaction is initially measured at its fair value as at the date of acquisition.





Recognition Revenue from Non-Exchange Transactions



An inflow of resources from a non-exchange transaction recognized as an asset is recognized as revenue, except to the extent that a liability is also recognized in respect of the same inflow.





Measurement of Revenue from Non-Exchange Transactions



Revenue from non-exchange transactions is measured at the amount of the increase in net assets recognized by the entity, unless a corresponding liability is recognized.





Gifts and Donations



The USTP-Claveria recognizes assets and revenue from gifts and donations when it is probable that the future economic benefits or service potential will flow to the entity and the fair value of the assets can be measured reliably.



Goods in-kind were recognized as assets when the goods were received, or there is a binding arrangement to receive the goods. If goods in-kind were received without conditions attached, revenue is recognized immediately. If conditions were attached, a liability is recognized, which is reduced and revenue recognized as the conditions were satisfied.



On initial recognition, gifts and donations including goods in-kind were measured at their fair value as at the date of acquisition, which were ascertained by reference to an active market, or by appraisal. An appraisal of the value of an asset is normally undertaken by a member of the valuation profession who holds a recognized and relevant professional qualification. For many assets, the fair value were ascertained by reference to quoted prices in an active and liquid market.









Transfers



The USTP-Claveria recognizes an asset in respect of transfers when the transferred resources meet the definition of an asset and satisfy the criteria for recognition as an asset, except those arising from services in-kind.





Transfers from other government entities



Revenues from non-exchange transactions with other government entities and the related assets were measured at fair value and recognized on obtaining control of the asset (cash, goods, services and property) if the transfer is free from conditions and it is probable that the economic benefits or service potential related to the asset will flow to the USTSP-Claveria and can be measured reliably.





3.8  Revenue from Exchange transactions



Measurement of Revenue



Revenue was measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable.







Sale of Goods



Revenue from the sale of goods is recognized when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to the buyer, usually on delivery of the goods and when the amount of revenue can be measured reliably and it is probable that the economic benefits or service potential associated with the transaction will flow to the USTP-Claveria.





3.9  Budget information



The annual budget is prepared on a cash basis and is published in the government website. 



A separate Statement of Comparison of Budget and Actual Amounts (SCBAA) was prepared since the budget and the financial statements were not prepared on comparable basis.  The SCBAA was presented showing the original and final budget and the actual amounts on comparable basis to the budget.   Explanatory comments are provided in the notes to the annual financial statements.



3.10   Related parties



The   USTP-Claveria    regards   a   related party as   a    person or  an entity with the ability to exert control individually or jointly, or to exercise significant influence over  the University, or vice versa.





    Members of key management were regarded as related parties and comprise the members of the Board of Regents and the Executive Committee of the USTP System such as: President, Vice Presidents, Chancellors and Vice Chancellors of the USTP System.



 

3.11   Employee benefits



The employees of USTP-Claveria are member of the Government Service Insurance System (GSIS), which provides life and retirement insurance coverage. 



The USTP-Claveria recognizes the undiscounted amount of short term employee benefits, like salaries, wages, bonuses, allowance, etc., as expense unless capitalized, and as a liability after deducting the amount paid.



The USTP-Claveria recognizes expenses for accumulating compensated absences when these were paid (commuted or paid as terminal leave benefits). Unused entitlements that has accumulated at the reporting date were not recognized as expense. Non-accumulating compensated absences, like special leave privileges, were not recognized.





4)		Changes in Accounting Policies



USTP-Claveria adopted the following new accounting policies:



Criteria for Recognition of PPE 



On September 1, 2016, USTP-Claveria adopted the GAM Volume III which added to the existing criteria on the recognition of PPE.  The new standard includes the additional requirement for recognition of an item of PPE if it meets the capitalization threshold of ₱15,000 and is effective for years beginning January 2016.  This accounting change had no significant impact on USTP-Claveria’s consolidated financial statements. 



5)	Cash and Cash Equivalents



The USTP-Claveria aside form the MDS account in DBP, maintains ten other bank accounts. Two (2) in the Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP) and eight (8) in the Development bank of the Philippines (DBP), breakdown/details as follows:

                    

                     Account Name	                   Account No.	            Depository Bank

 

USTP-CLAVERIA TRUST FUND	      3532-0005-55      	Land Bank of the Philippines

USTP-CLAVERIA TRUST FUND	      3532-0033-41   	Land Bank of the Philippines

USTP-CLAVERIA TRUST FUND                   0810-010164-080        Development Bank of the Philippines

USTP-CLAVERIA BUSINESS CENTER	       0810-020153-030        Development Bank of the Philippines

USTP-CLAVERIA FTC		       0810-020159-080        Development Bank of the Philippines

USTP-CLAVERIA CAFETERIA  	       0810-020157-030        Development Bank of the Philippines

USTP-CLAVERIA EEC-RF		       0810-020155-080        Development Bank of the Philippines

USTP-CLAVERIA REVOLVING FUND	       0810-020162-030        Development Bank of the Philippines

       USTP-CLAVERIA SPECIAL TRUST FUND   0804-04029D-080        Development Bank of the Philippines

USTP-CLAVERIA SPECIAL TRUST FUND   0810-02156-030	Development Bank of the Philippines



6)	Loans and Receivables



The bulk of Accounts Receivables is from unpaid student accounts with subsidiary ledgers starting 2010. Starting SY 2018-2019, tuition and other school fees of students were billed to CHED-Unifast in compliance with the provisions of RA 10931 or the Free Higher Education Act.



Loans Receivable-Others mainly consists of the fund from CHED under the SAFE Loan Program. As of December 31, 2020, ₱985,500.00 remained uncollected, though the management through the Accounting Unit already sent demand letters.



The Inter-Agency Receivables consists of Due from National Government Agencies, amounting to ₱117,631.50, and Due from LGUs, amounting to ₱3,128,150.09 both ages more than three years. The Due from NGAs subsidiary accounts, are unsupported of documents to strengthen the university’s claim towards the debtors hence, no demand letters were sent. For the Due to LGUs account, there were collection letters mailed, however, no feedback was received during the year.  Below is the breakdown of each account:



		Name of Debtor			            	    Amount

		

Due from NGAs

ATI							₱  114,865.00

TESDA						        2,766.50

       Sub-total							₱  117,631.50



             Due from LGUs

		LGU-Opol, Mis. Or.		            		 ₱   50,000.00

		Cong. Augusto Baculio				      61,000.00

		Cong. Rolando Uy				 	 1,155,337.29

		Provincial Government of Mis. Or.			 1,730,077.80

		Provincial Government of Mis. Or. (Bal-ason)              131, 735.00

      	        Sub-total					         	           ₱3,128,150.09



     	  TOTAL				  	                       ₱3,245,781.59	

					   		

During the year, various Accounts Receivable from disallowances were also collected/settled. 



The Board of Regents during the Third Quarter BOR Meeting approved the proposed write-off of dormant accounts receivable amounting to ₱5,039,817.53, which is for submission to COA in January 2021.



Details and aging of the receivable accounts are shown below:



A)	Schedule of Accounts Receivable



----media/image38.emf----

----media/image39.emf----

----media/image40.emf----



B)	Schedule of Loan Receivable - Others



----media/image41.emf----



C)	Schedule of Receivable- Disallowances/Charges



----media/image42.emf----





D)	Schedule of Other Receivables



----media/image43.emf----



E)	Schedule of Due from National Government Agencies



----media/image44.emf----



F)	Schedule of Due from Local Government Units



----media/image45.emf----

G)	Schedule of Due from Non-Government Organizations/ People’s Organizations



----media/image46.emf----



7)	Inventories	









Accounts

CY 2020

(in thousand pesos)



Inventories carried at the lower of cost and net realizable value

Inventories carried at fair value less cost to sell

Inventory write-down recognized during the year

Reversal of Inventory write-down recognized during the year

Inventory Held for Sale









Carrying Amount, January 1, 2020

60

-

-



Additions/Acquisitions during the year

2,355

-

-



Expense during the year except write-down 

         (2,382)

-

-



Write-down during the year

-

-

-



Reversal of Write-down during the year

-

-

-



Carrying Amount, December 31, 2020

              33 

-

-



Inventory Held for Consumption

 







Carrying Amount, January 1, 2020

3,985

-

-



Additions/Acquisitions during the year

          7,189 

-

-



Expense during the year except write-down 

         (2,794)

-

-



Write-down during the year

-

-

-



Reversal of Write-down during the year

-

-

-



Carrying Amount, December 31, 2020

8,380

-

-



TOTAL CARRYING AMOUNT, DECEMBER 31, 2020

8,413

-

-





  Inventories held for sale are produce of other Income Generating Projects both agricultural and non-agricultural, purchased by the Business Center for sale to the USTP community and the public as well. This also includes inventory for sale in the Cafeteria.



8)		Other Current Assets

	

	The Other Current Asset account is mainly Advances to Contractors. This refers to unrecouped amount for mobilization fees.

	

9)	Property, Plant and Equipment





Land

Land Improvements

Infras

truc

ture

Assets

Buildings and Other Structures

Machi

nery

and Equip

ment

Trans

porta

tion Equip

ment

Furni

ture and Fixtures

Other PPE

CIP

TOTAL

Carrying Amount, January 1, 2020  

(in thousand pesos)

339

10,413

612

63,296

9,457

2,732

1,378

1,747

112,835

202,809

Additions/ Acquisitions



 

        14,929 

            41,142 

            3,566 

          3,995 

          3,200 

            476 

            19,237 

            86,545 

Total

           339 

      10,413 

      15,541 

        104,438 

        13,023 

        6,727 

        4,578 

        2,223 

        132,072 

        289,354 

Disposals/ Adjustments

 - 

         (9,779)

              (8)

          (11,537)

          (2,534)

           (225)

        (2,405)

            623 

          (53,652)

          (79,516)

	Depreciation (As per  Statement of Financial Performance)







-

        (13.11)

      (166.58)

        (2,809.28)

      (1,957.49)

      (429.06)

      (935.02)

      (455.43)

 - 

            (6,766)

	Impairment Loss (As per  Statement of Financial Performance)

-

-



-

-









-

Carrying Amount, December 31, 2020

(As per Statement of Financial Position)

           339 

           621 

      15,366 

          90,092 

          8,531 

        6,073 

        1,238 

        2,391 

          78,420 

        203,072 



There are several infrastructure projects booked under Construction-in-Progress account, details as follows:



No.

Project Title

Amount

Fund Source



1.



Establishment of Irrigation and Water System



21,242,944.79



GAA



3.



Repair and Improvement of Admin Building Phase 7



1,052,089.14



GAA



4.

Construction of 25 Classroom Five Storey Bldg Phase 1



22,050,098.94



GAA



5.



Construction of 25 Classroom Five Storey Bldg Phase 2



19,276,520.27



GAA



6.



4 Storey 20 Rooms International Dormitory



6,921,999.57



GAA



7.

Conversion of Multi-Purpose Building into Student Learning Center



999,945.69



GAA



8.



Volleyball Court



138,600



IGF



9.



Completion of Milking Parlor



1,002,976.94



IGF



10.



Repair and Improvement of Admin Building Phase 9



3,159,419.75



IGF



11.



Completion of University Football Field and Oval



2,575,623.91



IGF



TOTAL

78,420,219.00





10)	  Biological Assets



10.1 Breeding Stocks



   During the year, the University recognized Breeding Stocks valued at ₱3,495,000.00 from the NDA. 



	     10.2 Livestock

	

				   Livestock with a total valuation of ₱1,738,064.85 were recognized during the year.

	             The amount represents cows born during the year.



11)		Financial Liabilities

	

	1)		Accounts Payable	

	

	The Accounts Payable accounts consists of unpaid goods, services, progress billings, and personnel claims as of December 31, 2020. 

	

	Details and breakdown of the accounts payable are shown below:

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	Schedule of Accounts Payable

	

	----media/image47.emf----

	

	----media/image48.emf----

	

	

	

	----media/image49.emf----

	

	

	

	

	----media/image50.emf----

	

	

	

	

	----media/image51.emf----

	

	

	

	

	

	----media/image52.emf----

	

12)			Inter-Agency Payables 

	

	The Inter-Agency Payables account consists of taxes withheld which are unremitted as of December 31, 2020. Unremitted premiums to GSIS, Philhealth and Pag-ibig were also included in this account. Due to NGAs in the amount of ₱4,252,043.32, which are transferred funds from various funding agencies for the implementation of various projects is also included in the account. 

	

	Details of the Due to NGAs are shown below:

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	Schedule of Due to National Government Agencies (NGAs)

	

	----media/image53.emf----

	

13)		Trust Liabilities

	

	Trust Liabilities mainly consists of receipts from government agencies for the implementation of scholarship programs and other form of grants to the students. 

	

14)		Other Payables 

	

	Retention from payments of progress billings for infrastructure projects were included in these account. Fund transfers from private agencies were also included as shown below: 

	

	Schedule of Other Payables

	

	----media/image54.emf----

	

	----media/image55.emf----

	

	

	

	----media/image56.emf----

	

	

	----media/image57.emf----

	

15)		Revenue

	

	15.1 Service and Business Income

	

Tuition and Other School Fees, Income from IGP operations and Interest Income from bank deposits comprise this account. Details as follows: 



School Fees								₱ 66,196,332.11

Rent/Lease Income 						              	          39,764.00

Income from Hostels/Dormitories and Other Like Facilities			        183,915.00

Sales Revenue					      6,675,882.30

   Less: Sales Discounts			 	                   -                        6,675,882.30 

Interest Income 							                       36,340.53

Fines and Penalties-Business Income 					            5,025.00

      Other Business Income   					                               4,299,830.84

Total Business Income						            ₱ 77,437,089.78















Below are the details of the Financial Performance of each Income Generating Project:



Name of Project

Gross Income

Expenses

Net Income/(Loss)

Rice

           ₱159,137.00

          ₱188,857.89

₱(29,720.89)

Diversified Crop Enterprise

80,237.70

176,880.53

(96,642.83)

Model Farm

151,364.60

152,274.68

(910.08)

Dairy

3,340,343.79

2,523,292.78

1,262,651.01

Cafeteria

1,264,590.36

1,350,752.40

(86,162.04)

Water Refilling Station

268,864.64

230,793.72

38,170.92

Business Center

27,921.72

8,109.00

19,812.72

Farmer’s Training Center

₱189,800.00

₱232,202.23

₱(42,402.23)



			15.2 Gains

		

		During the year, ₱1,446,000 was recorded as Gain on Initial Recognition of Biological Assets in the dairy farm. 



16)	Personnel Services



16.1 Salaries and Wages



During the year, a total of ₱47,851,480.74 was spent for the salaries of regular personnel and ₱ 2,021,257.01 for the salaries of casual personnel. 



16.2 Other Compensation



₱15,648,145.58 was paid for other compensation with the following details:



Personal Economic Relief Allowance (PERA)	           ₱1,657,312.40

Representation Allowance (RA) 				    268,000.00

Transportation Allowance (TA)				    268,000.00

Clothing/Uniform Allowance				    390,000.00   

Honoraria						             3,060,598.83  

Hazard Pay					                  42,000.00 

Overtime and Night Pay					      51,379.35

Year End Bonus					             7,341,855.00

Cash Gift							    348,000.00

      Other Bonuses and Allowances		         	  	 2,221,000.00

Total Other Compensation		                     ₱15,648,145.58

	

17)	Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses

	

	MOOE is broken down as follows:

	

Account

Amount

Percentage to Total 

Traveling Expenses

₱1,024,154.46 

1.96%

Training and Scholarship Expenses

423,620.00

0.81%

Supplies and Materials Expenses

14,724,943.86

28.12%

Utility Expenses

2,191,396.58

4.19%

Communication Expenses

2,398,892.40

4.58%

Awards/Rewards and Prizes

276,000.00

0.53%

Confidential, Intelligence and Extraordinary Expenses                          

117,000.00

0.22%

Professional Services

18,312,265.85

34.98%

General Services

2,443,562.71

4.67%

Repairs and Maintenance

1,507,187.26

2.88%

Taxes, Insurance Premiums and Other Fees

463,884.42

0.89%

Labor and Wages

5,766,727.16

11.01%

Other Maintenance and Operating Expenses

2,708,483.01

5.17%

TOTAL

₱52,358,117.71 



	

18)	Non-Cash Expenses



This consist of the periodic recognition of depreciation for the normal wear and tear of PPE items, details as follows:



Depreciation-Land Improvements			           ₱ 13,110.12 

Depreciation-Infrastructure Assets				 166,576.74 

Depreciation-Buildings and Other Structures		          2,809,278.12 

Depreciation-Machinery and Equipment 		         	          1,957,492.41 

Depreciation-Transportation Equipment			             429,059.28 

Depreciation-Furniture, Fixtures and Books  			 935,021.41 

Depreciation-Other Property, Plant and Equipment		 455,427.38 

Total Depreciation 					        ₱3,901,035.09



19)	Direct Expenses



This includes the Cost of Sales recognized under the Income Generating Projects namely the Cafeteria and Business Center in the aggregate amount of ₱5,114,444.22.



20)	Financial Assistance/Subsidy



During the year, the University received Notice of Cash Allocation in the total amount of ₱125,508,000.00. Tax Remittance Advice (TRA) amounted to ₱9,832,215.37. The Net Subsidy from the National Government for FY 2020 is ₱131,077,376.25 after adjustments for cash reversions in the amount of ₱4,216,903.12. Details as follows:



Date

NCA/TRA number

 Total Amount 

NCA (regular)

 TRA 

 2020

NCA-ROX-20-0000826

        ₱6,871,000.00 

          ₱6,871,000.00 

 

 

012000034421078

           604,250.72 

 

      ₱604,250.72 

Total for January

 

        7,475,250.72 

           6,871,000.00 

      604,250.72 

 

NCA-ROX-20-0000826

        6,871,000.00 

           6,871,000.00 

 

 

012000034978769

           319,907.62 

 

      319,907.62 

Total for February

 

        7,190,907.62 

           6,871,000.00 

      319,907.62 

 

NCA-ROX-20-0000826

        6,873,000.00 

           6,873,000.00 

 

 

012000035331473

           319,953.03 

 

      319,953.03 

Total for March

 

        7,192,953.03 

           6,873,000.00 

      319,953.03 

 

NCA-ROX-20-0004089

       23,972,000.00 

          23,972,000.00 

 

 

012000035543780

           934,968.76 

 

      934,968.76 

Total for April

 

       24,906,968.76 

          23,972,000.00 

      934,968.76 

 

NCA-ROX-20-0005331

        2,454,000.00 

           2,454,000.00 

 

 

NCA-ROX-20-0005332

           395,000.00 

              395,000.00 

 

Total for May

 

        2,849,000.00 

           2,849,000.00 

                   -   

 

012000036020484

        2,357,591.36 

 

   2,357,591.36 

Total for June

 

        2,357,591.36 

                           -   

   2,357,591.36 

 

NCA-ROX-20-0006513

       15,429,000.00 

          15,429,000.00 

 

 

NCA-ROX-20-0006855

        7,507,000.00 

           7,507,000.00 

 

 

012000036714615

           576,652.70 

 

      576,652.70 

Total for July

 

       23,512,652.70 

          22,936,000.00 

      576,652.70 

 

NCA-ROX-20-0006855

       14,446,000.00 

          14,446,000.00 

 

 

012000037122995

        1,423,676.88 

 

   1,423,676.88 

Total for August

 

       15,869,676.88 

          14,446,000.00 

   1,423,676.88 

 

012000037625142

        1,030,774.64 

 

   1,030,774.64 

Total for September

 

        1,030,774.64 

                           -   

   1,030,774.64 

 

NCA-ROX-20-0006855

       36,372,000.00 

          36,372,000.00 

 

 

012000038064952

           646,746.78 

 

      646,746.78 

Total for October

 

       37,018,746.78 

          36,372,000.00 

      646,746.78 

 

012000038564627

           710,308.88 

 

      710,308.88 

Total for November

 

           710,308.88 

                           -   

      710,308.88 

 

NCA-ROX-20-0015203

        4,318,000.00 

           4,318,000.00 

 

 

012000039170119

           907,384.00 

 

      907,384.00 

Total for December

 

        5,225,384.00 

           4,318,000.00 

      907,384.00 

Grand Total

 

     ₱135,340,215.37 

        ₱125,508,000.00 

  ₱ 9,832,215.37 



21)	Comparison of Budget and Actual Amounts



The University estimated Service and Business Income at ₱66,680,000.00 which includes collection of Tuition and Other School Fees for the 2nd Semester of SY 2019-2020 and 1st Semester of SY 2020-2021, and Income from the Income Generating Projects operations. 



During the last quarter of the preceding year, a Program of Receipts and Expenditures was prepared taking into consideration the figures per National Expenditure Program and the Income from Tuition and Other School Fees based on the projected enrolment for the succeeding School Year. Also included were projections for the operations of the Income Generating Projects. 









21.1 Changes from Original to Final Budget



Shown below is the details of the difference in the Original and Final budgeted amounts:





Particulars



Original

Adjustments for



Final





Continuing Appropriations

Discontinued Items

Realignments



PS

₱  57,377,000

₱  1,580,685.67



₱         9,000

₱ 58,966,686.67

MOOE 

92,367,000

10,764,155.27

₱  (9,468,000)

(3,110,000)

90,553,155.27

CO

30,160,000



(2,000,000)

3,101,000 

 31.261.000.00

Total

₱179,904,000

₱12,344,840.94

₱(11,468,000)

₱                 -

₱ 180,780,841.94



Continuing Appropriations represents unobligated allotments from FY 2019 which validity was extended until December 31, 2020. Discontinued items are allotments that were offered by the University for discontinuance in response to NBC 580 to fund COVID initiatives of the national government. Realignments refer to items that the university realigned from MOOE to CO and other MOOE items within the Internally Generated Funds for COVID response programs and projects. This mainly consist of ICT Equipment, Semi-Expendable ICT Equipment, and Communication Expenses.



21.2 Reconciliation of Actual Amounts on a Comparable Basis (Budget) and

              Actual Amounts in the Financial Statements



Particulars

Actual Amounts on a comparable Basis (Budget)

Balances, receipts

₱196,078,585.86

Basis Differences



Receivables credited to income during the year

67,380,573.9

Cash Collections for accrued income

(72,098,793.62)

TRA credited to subsidy income

(9,832,215.37)

NCA for AP credited to subsidy income

15,429,000

RLIP

2,800,000

SAROs received

6,457,315

Other adjustments

2,290,000.26

Balance per FS

₱208,504,466.03



























Income figures in the financial statements are recorded on an accrual basis while budget figures are recorded on a cash basis.





























PART   II - OBSERVATIONS AND

 			RECOMMENDATIONS

AUDIT OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS



Financial and Compliance Audit



1)		Purchase of supplies and materials amounting to ₱1,386,852.38 were taken up as outright expenses, contrary to Sec. 9, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM), resulting 	in the understatement of the inventory accounts, and overstatement of expenses. 



Sec. 9, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of Government Accounting Manual (GAM) states that:



“Perpetual Inventory Method. Supplies and materials purchased for inventory purpose shall be recorded using the perpetual inventory system, resulting in a more accurate inventory records and a running total for the cost of goods sold in each period. The System requires accounting records to show the amount of inventory on hand at all times through the maintenance of SLC (Appendix 57) by the Accounting Division/ Unit and Stock Card (SC) (Appendix 58) by the Supply and/or Property Division/ Unit for each item in stock. Regular purchases shall be coursed through the inventory account and issues thereof shall be recorded as they takes place except for supplies and materials purchased out of PCF for immediate use or on emergency cases which shall be charged directly to appropriate expense account.”



Our post-audit of disbursement vouchers for the month of July 2020 disclosed that purchases of supplies and materials totaling ₱1,386,852.38 were taken up as outright expenses.  Detailed are shown below:

Date

DV No.

Payee

Account Debited

Amount Recorded

2/6/2020

A-20-07-255

DARBS Corporation

Other Supplies & Material Expenses

 ₱     684,019.98 

2/18/2020

A-20-07-252

Columbia Computer Center, Inc.

Office Supplies Expenses

 406,720.00 

5/14/2020

A-20-07-309

V.S Tay, Incorporated

Office Supplies Expenses

 67,045.42 







Office Supplies and Material Expenses

 154,066.98 

2/24/2020

A-20-07-287



Copylandia Office System  Corporation

Office Supplies Expenses

 75,000.00 

TOTAL  

 ₱ 1,386,852.38 





The accounting office inadvertently failed to properly record the receipt of the above supplies to its appropriate Inventory account.  Accordingly, all issuances thereof should have been recorded to its appropriate Expense Account based on the Report of Supplies and Materials Issued (RSMI).



The above manner of recording in the books upon purchase has resulted in the understatement of the inventory account, and overstatement of expenses at the time 

of payment.  Further, the issued supplies were not duly accounted for nor recorded in the appropriate expense accounts. 



We recommended that management prepare adjusting journal entries to correct the entries made at the time of payment; retrieve the RSMIs on the above-procured supplies and prepare adjusting JEVs to record the expense portion thereof; and strictly adhere to the provisions of Sec. 9, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of GAM.



Management Comment:



The RSMIs were retrieved and a summary of which was prepared. The inventory and expense portion were determined amounting to ₱646,563.35 and ₱740,389.03, respectively. A JEV was drawn to effect adjustment in the inventory account. 



Auditor’s Rejoinder:



The audit team will keep track of the adjustments made by the accountant in the CY 2021 Financial Statements.



1)			Issuance of semi-expendable furniture and fixtures to the end-user amounting to ₱1,978,575.44 were not recognized as expenses, contrary to Sec. 10, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM), resulting in the understatement of expenses and overstatement of the inventory accounts.



Sec. 10, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of Government Accounting Manual (GAM) states that:



“Semi-expendable Property. Tangible items below the capitalization threshold of ₱15,000.00 shall be accounted as semi-expendable property. The following policies apply as follows:



Semi-expendable property which were recognized as PPE shall be reclassified to the affected accounts. These Tangible items shall be recognized as expenses upon issue to the end-user.”



Post-audit of disbursement vouchers for the month of July 2020 disclosed that procurement of furniture and fixtures below the capitalization threshold of ₱15,000.00 amounting to ₱1,978,575.44, were recorded as Semi-expendable property.  Details are shown below:



DV No.

Payee

Account Debited

Amount Recorded

ICS No.

A-20-07-243

Asahi Design Centre Inc.

Semi-Expendable Furniture and Fixtures

₱1,978,575.44

20-16



Accordingly, the above-procured items were issued to the end user units as evidenced by the Inventory Custodian Slip No. 20-16 dated January 16, 2020.  



Despite its issuance, the Accounting Office did not recognize the appropriate expense account in the books, thus, resulting to the overstatement of the inventory account and understatement of expenses.



We recommended that management prepare adjusting entries to correct the books of accounts, and strictly adhere to the provisions of Sec. 10, Chapter 8, Vol. 1 of Government Accounting Manual (GAM).



Management Comment:



The Accounting Office made the necessary adjustments in the books per JEV No. 21-01-001 dated January 8, 2021. All other entries affecting the Semi-Expendable accounts were reviewed and the corresponding JEVs were drawn to effect the adjustments.



Auditor’s Rejoinder:



The Audit Team will monitor the adjustments made in January, 2021. Both the Accounting and Supply Offices should regularly review all Semi-expendable items to avoid recurrence of the same deficiencies. 



2)		Completed projects recorded as Construction in Progress (CIP)- Building and Other Structures under Funds 01 and 05 amounting to P 1,052,089.14 and                        P 1,141,576.54, respectively, were not reclassified to the appropriate Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) account, contrary to Sec. 8(g), Chapter 10, Volume I of Government Accounting Manual (GAM), thus understating the PPE account and its related accumulated depreciation/depreciation expense, and overstating the CIP account.

   

Sec. 8(g), Chapter 10, Volume I of Government Accounting Manual (GAM) states that: 

 

“xxx. As soon as the construction is completed, the “Construction in Progress” account shall be reclassified to the proper asset account. xxx” 



Review of the agency’s General Ledger for the Construction in Progress (CIP)- Buildings and Other Structures account as of November 30, 2020 for Funds 01 and 05 disclosed a balance of P 56,837,072.96 and P 4,177,210.71, respectively.  Details of the CIP account further disclosed that charges were made for the costs incurred related to the following projects: 



Fund 01

Name of Project

Amount 

1)	Construction of Admin. Building Phase 7

P  1,052,089.14

2)	Construction of Admin. Building Phase 8

    3,386,379.60

3)	Construction of 25-classroom 5-storey building (Phase 1) 

       22,050,098.94

4)	Construction of 25-classroom 5-storey building (Phase 2)

       19,276,520.27

5)	Construction of international dormitory

         6,921,999.57

6)	Conversion of VO-AG building into science laboratory

         1,370,036.85

7)	Conversion of Multi-Purpose building into science learning center

         2,779,948.59

TOTAL

P 56,837,072.96 





















Fund 05

Name of Project

Amount 

1)	Rehabilitation of volleyball court

P       138,600.00

2)	Completion of milking parlor

      1,002,976.54

3)	Completion of Admin. Building

          2,857,635.59

4)	Completion of Multi-Purpose Building

             177,998.58

TOTAL

P 4,177,210.71 

















Our verification revealed that among the completed projects, three (3) projects remained in the CIP and were not adjusted to the appropriate asset account.  Interview with the Accountant disclosed that the contractors of these projects did not submit their final progress billing despite the projects’ full completion in CY 2016-2018.  Details of the projects are shown below:



Fund 01

Name of Project

Amount 

1)	Construction of Admin. Building Phase 7

P  1,052,089.14



Fund 05

Name of Project

Amount 

1)	Rehabilitation of volleyball court

P       138,600.00

2)	Completion of milking parlor

      1,002,976.54

                                                                  TOTAL

   P     1,141,576.54  



As a result, the CIP account is overstated and the PPE account is understated.  Provisions for depreciation expense and the related accumulated depreciation were not also undertaken, thus affecting the fairness of the financial statements.         



We recommended that management undertake the following:



a)	Communicate with the contractor on the existence of outstanding payables relative to the fully-completed projects at hand;



b)	Issue Certificate of Completion for projects which has been satisfactorily 100% completed; and



c)	Compute the depreciation expense and accordingly, prepare all the necessary adjusting entries for the affected accounts.



Management Comment:



The Accounting Office, as a matter of practice, only record adjustments in the Construction-in-Progress account once a Certificate of Completion is furnished to the office, which only happens when the Contractor submits a final billing.



In compliance to the audit team’s recommendations, the Accountant already coordinated with the Vice President for Legal Affairs to assist in the communication with the contractor and with the personnel in the former Project Development Office in the issuance of Certificate of Completion for the three (3) projects.



As of February, 2021, the Accounting Office already received the Certificate of Completion for the “Construction of Administration Building Phase 7 Project”. A JEV was drawn to effect the necessary adjustment in the January, 2021. 



Auditor’s Rejoinder:



The audit team requested for copies of the Certificate of Completion and Statement of Work Accomplishment (SWA) for the completed project: Construction of Admin. Building Phase 7, for verification purposes. For the other completed projects such as the Rehabilitation of Volleyball Court and Completion of Milking Parlor, the accountant shall coordinate with the personnel from the Project Development Office (PDO) for the details thereof considering that these projects were completed for over one (1) year already.  



1)	Five (5) Infrastructure projects with a total contract amount of ₱137,244,187.40 remained unfinished despite the expiration of contract time contrary to the agreed terms and conditions of the contracts, thereby depriving the school constituents of its immediate and maximum utilization had these projects been implemented.

	

Contract Agreement was executed by the concerned Agency and contractor to define the scope of works, duration, terms and conditions, wherein both parties are bound to adhere, otherwise, corresponding penalties shall be imposed.



One of the primary considerations of the government for entering into a contract is the timely completion of the infrastructure projects so that the intended benefits may be achieved. Consequently, the contracting parties are bound to adhere faithfully to agreed terms and conditions of the contract.



Review of the submitted agency’s Report of Government Projects, Programs and Activities (RGPPA) for the 4th Quarter CY 2020 disclosed the following:



No.





Project 

Name





Contract 

Amount

Date Started

Contract expiry/



 Revised Target Date of Completion after time extension/ suspension/  variation order

% Work Accomplished 

1

Full Completion of Admin Building Phase 9

₱   4,791,187.40

September 2018

March 2019

73%

2

Construction of 4-Storey 20 Rooms International Dormitory - Phase I

17,094,000.00

December 2018

April 2019

45%

3

Establishment of Irrigation and Water system



40,000,000.00

December 2017

April 2020

60%

4

Completion of solar Powered 5-Storey 25-Classroom Building Phase II

52,000,000.00

June 2018

October 25, 2019

39%

5

Construction of 25 Classroom 5-Storey Building Phase I

23,359,000.00

October 2016

October 25, 2019

98%



TOTAL

₱ 137,244,187.40









Interview with the Former Director of the University’s Project Development Office (PDO) disclosed the status of the above-mentioned projects:



No.

Project Name

Status

1

Full Completion of Admin Building Phase 9

On-going; with extension letter; Latest billing (4th Progress Billing) was made in December 2020.

2

Establishment of Irrigation and Water system

On-going; with extension letter due to COVID-19; Lifting of Suspension was served on January 11, 2021.

3

Construction of 4-Storey 20 Rooms International Dormitory - Phase I

On-going; Management issued the contractor an undated order to show cause why the contract should not be terminated; As of Dec. 31, 2019, the project incurred negative slippage of 67%. 

4

Completion of solar Powered 5-Storey 25-Classroom Building Phase II

Management issued the contractor an undated order to show cause why the contract should not be terminated; As of Dec. 31, 2019, the project incurred negative slippage of 69.16%.

5

Construction of 25 Classroom 5-Storey Building Phase I

Management issued the contractor an undated order to show cause why the contract should not be terminated.



Several follow-ups were conducted by the management for the contractors to submit their respective catch-up plans. In the absence of their catch-up plans, three (3) contractors were notified to show cause why the project should not be terminated.  Copies of these notices are herein attached, marked Appendices A, B and C.  Otherwise, the University will be constrained to issue an order terminating the contract.  Accordingly, the contractors have resumed their works.  



These unfinished construction projects were covered by time extensions, suspension orders and variation orders issued by the University due to unfavorable weather conditions and modifications of plans, designs and program of works.  Management failed to consider these factors during the preliminary engineering study on the viability of the projects.  This hampered the immediate completion of the projects that resulted in the inefficient implementation, thus, depriving the school constituents of the immediate and maximum utilization had these projects been implemented.



We recommended that the management shall undertake the following measures:



a)	Send demand letters/ notices to contractors to expedite the project completion, otherwise, terminate the contract, if warranted, in accordance with Annex “I” of CY 2016 Revised IRR of RA 9184;



b)	Strictly monitor and supervise the accomplishments of the contractors, particularly on the incurrence of negative slippage/s; and



c)	Impose liquidated damages for every day of delay as well as sanctions set forth under Section 68 and Annex “I” of Revised CY 2016 RA 9184 and its IRR.



Management Comment:



The management already sent a demand letter to Aguero Construction for the unfinished Project: Construction of the Solar Powered 5-Storey, 25 Classroom Building, Phase II. However, no demand letters were sent to the four (4) unfinished projects, namely: Full Completion of Admin Building Phase 9, Establishment of Irrigation and Water System, Construction of 4-Storey 20 Rooms International Dormitory - Phase I, and Construction of 25 Classroom 5-Storey Building Phase I.



As part of the monitoring  action of the management, a detailed catch-up plan will be required from the contractors and liquidation damages shall be imposed to every day of delay.



During the exit conference, the management informed the audit team that a Technical and Legal Committee was created for the review and evaluation of the above-mentioned projects. 



Auditor’s Rejoinder:



The newly-created Technical and Legal Committee planned to meet with the contractors and monitor the progress status of these unfinished projects especially those which are already abandoned by the contractors namely, Construction of 4-story 20 Rooms International Dormitory (Phase I) and Completion of Solar Powered 5-story 25 classroom Building Phase II.  The audit team will keep track of the developments made by the management relative to the status of these unfinished projects.



1)	Cash in Bank account balance was understated by P 322,956.55 due to non-recording of unreleased checks contrary to the provisions of Sec. 56 of Chapter 19, Vol I of Government Accounting Manual (GAM), thus, affecting the reliability of the reported cash in bank accounts as of year- end.



Sec. 56, Chapter 19, Vol. 1 of Government Accounting Manual (GAM) states that a Schedule of Unreleased Commercial Checks shall be prepared by the Cashier for submission to the Accounting Division/Unit. All unreleased checks at the end of the year shall be reverted back to the cash accounts. A JEV shall be prepared to recognize the restoration of the cash equivalent to the unreleased checks and the recognition of the appropriate liability/payable account. The accounting entry for the restoration of the unreleased check to the cash account shall be a debit to “Cash in Bank, Local Currency Current” account with credit to the appropriate liability account.  There shall be no physical cancellation of the checks. The JEV supporting such restoration shall form part of the supporting document to the financial statements to be submitted to COA at year end.  At the start of the ensuing year, another JEV shall be drawn to reverse the previous entry made and recognize the availability of the checks for release. This procedure shall not apply to account “Cash-Modified Disbursement System (MDS)” since there is no actual cash with the GSBs.”  



Review of cash records disclosed that as of year-end, there were several processed checks totaling P 322,956.55 which were still in the possession of the Cashier or which remained unreleased to the payees as follows:



Bank Accounts

Amount

Revolving Fund (DBP Acct. No. # 0810-020155-080)

P                  2,012.96

FTC (DBP CA # 0810-020159-080)

                     4,225.92

Trust Fund (CA # 000-353-0000-3532000555)

                   72,521.43

Special Trust Fund (DBP Acct. No. # 0810-020156-030)

                 244,196.24

TOTAL

P              322,956.55



Verification disclosed that these checks were already reported as issued in the Cashier’s Cashbook, hence, reducing the cashbook balance by that amount.  Likewise, these unreleased checks were included in the December 2020 Report of Checks Issued together with the disbursement vouchers (DVs) which were forwarded to the Accounting Office for the drawing of the corresponding Journal Entry Vouchers (JEVs).  The unreleased checks were, therefore, recorded as paid disbursements contrary to Sec. 56 of Chapter 19 of GAM Vol. I.



Hence, it was improper to record unreleased checks as deductions from the cash in bank balance since the disbursement transactions have not been consummated yet.  

 

The non-adjustment of these identified reconciling item by the Accounting Unit has affected the reliability of the reported cash in bank accounts in the agency’s Statement of Financial Position as at year-end.



We recommended that management direct the Accountant to draw JEV to restore the cash in bank and book up liabilities to present fairly the recorded cash in bank and accounts payable accounts.



Management Comment:



The Accounting Office, as a matter of practice, only records whatever is reflected in the Report of Checks Issued without considering the effect of unreleased checks in the Financial Statements. The accountant will properly adjust at the year-end the amounts for unreleased checks.



Auditor’s Rejoinder:



The Audit Team will monitor the adjustments made in the books in January, 2021.



Gender and Development (GAD)



Considering the current COVID-19 pandemic situation, the USTsP – Claveria Campus has not fully complied with the requirements set forth by DBM-NEDA-PCW Joint Circular 2004-1 dated April 5, 2004 and Section 32 of GAA, FY 2019. Although the Campus has prepared the Annual Gender and Development Plan and Accomplishment Report for FY 2020, it was not, however, compliant with the minimum five percent (5%) GAD Budget required under the aforementioned provisions.



The Campus’ Original Budget for GAD related activities was only P6,290,000.00 or 5% of the Total Projected Budget, FY 2020 of P125,800,000.00. The Actual GAD Expenditure incurred by the University was only P138,989.00, or 2.20% of the GAD Budget and only 0.12% of the Total Annual Budget, FY 2020 of P114,332,000.00. Details of the activities are breakdown as follows: 

GAD Activity

Actual Outputs/ Outcomes 

Budget

Actual 

I. Client Focused Activities

1.

To design a program for GAD database in the MIS

on-going

 ₱       700,000.00 

₱               0.00



2.

To conduct a meeting among lactating student mothers

To be conducted 

             60,000.00 

0.00



3.

Gender Sensitivity Training

Not conducted due to covid 19

           370,000.00 

0.00

4.

Orientationon Basic GAD concepts, issues and concerns

Not conducted due to covid 19

           270,000.00 

0.00

5.

Engagement of students through Art Competition: a. Essay-writing on the theme-" Women: Active Force in Development" and b. Painting Contest on " Faces of Empowered Women in the Society."

Not conducted due to covid 19

 150,000.00 

0.00

6.

Design a program for GAD database on partner beneficiaries

On-going

           250,000.00 

                 0.00

7.

Student-participated discussions on VAWC

Not conducted due to covid 19

           150,000.00 

                 0.00



Sub-total

 ₱     1,950,000.00 

 ₱              0.00 

II. Organization-Focused Activities

8.

Conduct of Gender-Fair Language seminar-workshop

Not conducted due to covid 19

           860,000.00 

                 0.00

9.

To conduct Gender Sensitivity Training among the faculty and staff.

Not conducted due to covid 19

        1,200,000.00 

                 0.00

10.

Conduct of training on GAD concepts and policies. Attend national and international GAD-related training.

Not conducted due to covid 19

        1,300,000.00 

                 0.00

11.

Holding of conversation groups on relevant topics about Women's Month Celebration and wearing of advocacy T-shirts every Monday for the month of March.

Not conducted due to covid 19

        1,000,000.00 

                 0.00

12.

Establishment of GAD-Responsive R&E Agenda

On-going

           800,000.00 

 138,980.00 

13.

To involve the TWG and GFPS in the drafting of GPB.

On-going

           700,000.00 

                 0.00

Sub-total

 ₱5,860,000.00 

 ₱138,980.00 

Grand Total

 ₱7,810,000.00 

 ₱138,980.00 



C.  Property Insurance Law (RA No. 656)



The University has complied with RA No. 656 on the establishment of “Property Insurance Fund.” A total of ₱87,637.60 insurance premiums were paid to GSIS for the sum of insurance amounting to ₱15,879,742.00.











D.  Compliance with GSIS Law (RA 8291)



In compliance with RA 8291 the Government Service Insurance System Act, as reiterated in COA Memorandum No. 2016-007, the University had remitted a total of                                   ₱9,193,692.27 for premiums and loan payments for CY 2020.



E.  Compliance with Tax Laws (RA 8424)



USTsP – Claveria Campus had properly accounted and remitted its CY 2020 taxes withheld from employees’ salaries and payment to contractors/suppliers in compliance with RA 8424- National Internal Revenue Code (NIRC).  During the year, the Campus had remitted a total amount of ₱10,214,016.06 out of the total taxes withheld of                                                   ₱12,154,404.77.



Of the ₱1,940,388.71 difference, ₱1,731,568.73 was remitted in January 2021, while the remaining balance thereof pertains to prior years’ untraceable transactions and remained to be unremitted in the books.



The table below shows the details of monthly taxes withheld and remitted for CY 2020:



Month

 Amount Tax Withheld 

 Amount Remitted 

 CY 2020 Balance 



 Salaries 

 Supplier 

 Total 





January

₱      603,376.04 

₱     75,920.65 

₱        679,296.69 

₱       626,973.56 

₱          52,323.13 

February

 319,125.40 

 45,223.27 

 364,348.67 

 353,914.06 

 10,434.61 

March

 319,125.40 

 29,063.11 

 348,188.51 

 385,041.05 

 (36,852.54)

April

 966,009.40 

 186,445.51 

 1,152,454.91 

 945,134.94 

 207,319.97 

May

 2,132,068.40 

 31,116.18 

 2,163,184.58 

 4,299.99 

 2,158,884.59 

June

 569,411.35 

 60,859.63 

 630,270.98 

 2,382,839.88 

 (1,752,568.90)

July

 523,697.14 

 911,684.19 

 1,435,381.33 

 590,626.20 

 844,755.13 

August

 501,598.04 

 566,676.32 

 1,068,274.36 

 1,521,516.31 

 (453,241.95)

September

 518,204.71 

 198,638.30 

 716,843.01 

 1,094,897.11 

 (378,054.10)

October

 505,167.57 

 240,547.00 

 745,714.57 

 646,746.78 

 98,967.79 

November

 894,250.22 

 113,850.23 

 1,008,100.45 

 754,642.18 

 253,458.27 

December

1,008,278.19 

834,068.52 

1,842,346.71 

907,384.00 

934,962.71 

TOTAL





₱   12,154,404.77 

₱  10,214,016.06 

₱     1,940,388.71 



A)	Status of Suspensions, Disallowances and Charges



As of December 31, 2020, the Statement of Audit Suspensions Disallowances and Charges (SASDC) reflected total suspension of P5,864,625.31 and total disallowances of P1,470,859.13.





Issuance

Beginning Balance

This Period

(January 1 to December 31, 2020)

Ending Balance



December 31, 2019

Issued

Settled

December 31, 2020

Notice of Charge

P                0.00

P0.00

P0.00

P               0.00

Notice of Suspension

17,915.20

  49,297,918.29 

  43,451,208.18 

5,864,625.31

Notice of Disallowance

1,604,118.33

6,769.12         

140,028.32             

1,470,859.13

Total

P1,622,033.53

P49,304,687.41  

P43,591,236.50

P7,335,484.44





















































PART   III -  STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION

         		    OF PRIOR YEAR’S AUDIT     

                        RECOMMENDATIONS

STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF PRIOR YEARS’ AUDIT RECOMMENDATIONS



As of December 31, 2020, there were eight (8) audit recommendations contained in the CY 2018 and 2014 Audit Annual Reports. Of which, two (2) were fully implemented; four (4) were partially implemented; and remaining two (2) were not implemented. 



Reference

Audit Observation

Recommendation

Status of Implementation

	2018 AAR



2018 AAR,

Observation No. 1,

Page 33





1.1 Assets below the capitalization threshold of P 15,000.00 totaling P 10,088,955.89 were capitalized as Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE) contrary to Sections 10 and 11, Chapter 8, Volume I of the Government Accounting Manual (GAM), thus, overstating the PPE accounts and understating the Inventory accounts;



1.2. Non-dropping of unserviceable properties found on station with total net book value of P1,469,363.81 and failure to request disposal, contrary to paragraphs (c) and (d), Section 40, Chapter 10, Volume I of GAM, thus, overstating the PPE accounts and understating the Expense account; and



1.3. 	Physical inventory report for some PPE items amounting toP1,860,766.75 did not tally with the balances per Accounting books of P1,304,369.75, showing a difference of P556,397.00, contrary to Section 42, Chapter 10, Vol. I of GAM, thus, the accuracy of the recorded PPE is doubtful.





3)	Update the PPE ledgers for each category of PPE;







4)	Direct the Supply Officer and Accountant to reclassify all semi-expendable properties which were previously recognized as PPE;









5)	Require the Supply Officer to submit a listing of all unserviceable properties subject for disposal; and  





















6)	Direct the Accounting and Supply Units to conduct a reconciliation of PPE per books and physical inventory to have a reliable balance and fair presentation of financial statements.



	

a)		FULLY IMPLEMENTED

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	FULLY IMPLEMENTED

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	NOT IMPLEMENTED

	

	As of date, there was no Listing of all unserviceable properties submitted to the Office of the Audit Team Leader, not even Inventory and Inspection Report of Unserviceable Properties (IIRUP). 

	

	

	

	

	

	NOT IMPLEMENTED



For CY 2020, no physical inventory-taking was conducted.



2018 AAR,

Observation No. 5,

Page 41



1)	Non-implementation of Establishment of Irrigation and Water System through Design-and-Build Scheme Project with a contract amount of P33,928,187.36, thereby, depriving the beneficiaries thereof of the expected benefits and allowing government funds to remain idle for more than a year, contrary to Section 2 of PD 1445 and Section 7, Annex “G” of CY 2016 Revised IRR of RA 9184.





Expedite implementation of the project; otherwise, terminate the contract, if warranted, in accordance with Annex “I” of CY 2016 Revised IRR of RA 9184.





ON-GOING

	

	For the 4thQ CY 2020, Report on Government Projects indicated 60% work accomplishment for the project.  The original contract duration is 100 calendar days (CDs) from Nov. 18, 2018 to Feb. 16, 2019, however, the contract time was revised by 316 calendar days due to four (4) time suspensions and one (1) time extension.

	

	 Lifting of suspension was served on Jan. 11, 2021.

	

	

2014 AAR



2014 AAR, Observation No. 2,

Page 26



1)	A total of P1.190 million loans granted to 238 MOSCAT students from CHED SAFE loan remained uncollected due to failure of imposing the sanctions against the defaulting students which resulted in limiting the availment instead of expanding the number of beneficiaries of the loan program.





We recommended to management to require the Finance Department to send collection/demand letters addressed to the parents of loan grantees with due and demandable accounts as the notarized promissory note declared the parents to have full responsibility in the repayment of unpaid loan and utilize all forms of social media to inform all grantees of their overdue SAFE accounts.







PARTIALLY IMPLEMENTED



Schedule of Loans Receivable – Others as of December 31, 2020 still disclosed a SAFE loan unpaid balance of                     P 985,500.00 (from P1,065,500.00 as of December 31, 2019). A collection of P 80,000.00 was made in CY 2020.





2014 AAR, Observation No. 3, 

Page 27

2)	The continued existence of dormant receivables of                  P 5,362,031.48 representing unpaid tuition fees from various defunct sponsors and receivables from patrons of the College income generating projects (IGPs) casts doubts on its collectability and validity of the reported balance.  

	



We reiterate our previous year recommendation that the College President require the Accountant to:



1. Analyze the dormant accounts amounting to P5.362 million and identify the account which collections are still feasible and send demand letters without delay; and  



2. After exhausting all possible legal means to demand settlement, request authority to write off of the dormant account balances from the Commission Audit following the guidelines prescribed in COA Circular No. 97-001 duly approved by the Board of Trustees to reflect the correct value of the account.



PARTIALLY IMPLEMENTED



As of December 31, 2020, the balance of dormant receivables amounted to       P 4,685,170.74.  Balances are detailed as follows:



Benefactor/ Debtor

Total





Loans Receivables – Others 

LGU Claveria

12,460.00

PTIA

   237,967.97 

TAPI

     94,115.83 

SAFE Loan

985,500.00 

Due from NGAs

ATI

   114,865.00 

TESDA

       2,766.50

Due from LGUs

Cong. Augusto Baculio

    61,000.00 

Cong. Rolando Uy

1,155,337.29 

Mis. Or. Provincial Gov't

1,730,077.80 

Bal-ason (Mis. Or)

   131,735.00 

LGU-Opol, Mis. Or.

     50,000.00 

Due from NGOs

Lantad MPC

     50,000.00 

MORAFFA-MPC

     50,000.00 

Other Receivables

Alicia Manuel

       9,020.50 

National Agribusiness Corp.

100.00

Susana Edrolin

224.85

Total

4,685,170.74

The same recommendation was reiterated by the team to the Management, that a request for authority to write-off dormant accounts will be made for accounts impossible to be collected.















































PART IV – APPENDICES









































NO.

PARTICULARS



APPENDIX

1

Show Cause Order for Termination of Contract to Joan Construction for the unfinished project: Construction of 25 Classroom 5-Story Building, Phase I.



A

2

Show Cause Order for Termination of Contract to Aguero Construction for the unfinished project: Construction of the Solar-Powered 5-Storey, 25 Classroom Building, Phase II (with Certificate of Negative Slippage and Proof of Mailing)



B

3

Show Cause Order for Termination of Contract to RYM Construction for the unfinished project: Construction of the 4-Storey, 20 Rooms International Dormitory, Phase I. (with Certificate of Negative Slippage and Proof of Mailing)



C













“Appendix A”

AAR CY 2020 Finding No. 4

----media/image58.jpeg----















“Appendix B”

AAR CY 2020 Finding No.----media/image59.jpeg----

“Appendix B”

AAR CY 2020 Finding No. 4

----media/image60.jpeg----

“Appendix B”

AAR CY 2020 Finding No. 4



----media/image61.jpeg----

“Appendix B”

AAR CY 2020 Finding No. 4



----media/image62.jpeg----





“Appendix C”

AAR CY 2020 Finding No. 4

----media/image63.jpeg----

“Appendix C”

AAR CY 2020 Finding No. 4

----media/image64.jpeg----



“Appendix C”

AAR CY 2020 Finding No. 4

----media/image65.jpeg----

“Appendix C”

AAR CY 2020 Finding No. 4



----media/image66.jpeg----



“Appendix C”

AAR CY 2020 Finding No. 4



----media/image67.jpeg----





58

58

































83

83

     



73







     



     







vi



vi







4



4







69

			

77







78

78







